 #lobbyingtransparency




INTERNATIONAL
STANDARDS FOR
LOBBYING REGULATION
Towards greater transparency,
integrity and participation.
             With the financial support of the Prevention of and Fight against Crime Programme European
             Commission - Directorate-General Home Affairs


© 2015 Access Info Europe, Open Knowledge, Sunlight Foundation, Transparency International.
All rights reserved. © Cover photo: Transparency International Lithuania.
CONTENTS
INTRODUCTION                                                                                   3

GUIDING PRINCIPLES                                                                             4

REGULATORY SCOPE                                                                               5

TRANSPARENCY                                                                                   6

INTEGRITY                                                                                      8

PARTICIPATION & ACCESS                                                                     10

OVERSIGHT, MANAGEMENT AND SANCTIONS                                                        12

REGULATORY FRAMEWORK DESIGN                                                                13




The International Standards for Lobbying Regulation are the result of two years of
collaborative work with civil society led by Transparency International, Access Info
Europe, Sunlight Foundation and Open Knowledge. This initiative is unique in that it
draws on the experience of a broad coalition of civil society organisations active in the
field of lobbying transparency and open governance, and goes further than existing
regulations and standards. The Standards aim at providing clear guidance to policymakers,
governments and international organisations that are thinking of or are in the process
of enacting lobbying legislation. They also serve as a reference point for civil society
organisations to campaign in their countries to ensure that efforts to regulate lobbying are
robust, comprehensive and effective.




                                                                                                   1
2
INTRODUCTION
The 38 standards set out here build on best practice from existing lobby regulations and
also reference various existing international standards on the matter. However, they go
beyond what is already available by addressing three critical and inter-related areas of
effective regulation of lobbying: transparency, integrity and participation, and in this way
go further than previous initiatives. They aim at internationally applicable standards, but
with an awareness and respect for national differences.

As of May 2015, at least 20 countries worldwide have a specific lobbying regulation in place
at the national level,1 though the quality of regulation varies widely. Even though lobbying
regulations are found mostly in industrialised regions, they are relevant for any country:
lobbying scandals all around the world including in developing countries are testimony to
the need for better regulation2 and a number of publications launched in recent years are
proof of the growing interest in lobbying regulation.3

The purpose of lobbying regulation is to ensure transparency of the impact of lobbying
on the decision-making process, as well as accountability of decision-makers for policies
and legislation enacted. Lobby regulation should aim to ensure a level playing field for all
actors to participate in the decision-making process on an equal footing, and there should
be specific mechanisms in place to prevent potential conflicts of interest that may arise
from attempts to influence the decision-making process. It is important to note also that
regulation is only one element of a strategy to ensure fair lobbying, and that enforcement
of any regulation, but also a broader willingness by all actors involved to act ethically, will
be crucial to creating an environment of ethical and fair lobbying and public decision-
making.

These standards remain under ongoing review and any suggestions for their further
development or refinement are welcome.




1   Australia, Austria, Brazil, Canada, Chile, France, Georgia, Germany, Hungary, Ireland, Israel, Lithuania, Macedonia, Montenegro, Peru,
    Poland, Slovenia, Taiwan, United Kingdom, and the United States.

2 In 2014, the U4 Anti-Corruption Resource Centre included “Lobbying” as a topic into its training course for development practitioners,
  www.u4.no/training/online-training/money-in-politics-curbing-corruption-in-political-finance; see also Nauro F. Campos, In pursuit of
  policy influence: Can lobbying be a legitimate alternative to corruption in developing countries?, U4 Brief 2009:1, www.u4.no/publica-
  tions/in-pursuit-of-policy-influence-can-lobbying-be-a-legitimate-alternative-to-corruption-in-developing-countries.

3 See for example Transparency International, Lobbying in Europe – Hidden Influence, Privileged Access, 2015: www.transparency.org/
  whatwedo/publication/lobbying_in_europe. Sunlight Foundation, International Lobbying Disclosure Guidelines, 2014: sunlightfoun-
  dation.com/policy/lobbying/guidelines/; Access Info Europe, Lobbying Transparency via Right to Information Laws, 2013: www.
  access-info.org/wp-content/uploads/Lobby_Transparency_via_RTI_26_June_2015.pdf and OECD “Lobbyists, Government and Public
  Trust”, Volume 1 “Increasing Transparency through Legislation” (2009), Volume 2 “Promoting Integrity through Self-regulation” (2012),
  Volume 3 “Implementing the OECD Principles for Transparency and Integrity in Lobbying” (2014: www.oecd.org/gov/ethics/lobbying.
  htm

                                                                                                                                             3
    GUIDING PRINCIPLES
    Lobbying is a legitimate activity and an important part of the democratic process.

    There is a significant public interest in ensuring the transparency and integrity of lobbying,
    as well as diversity of participation and contribution to public decision-making.

    Any regulatory measures to secure these ends shall be proportionate, fit for purpose and
    not impede on the individual rights of assembly, free speech and petition of government.




4
REGULATORY SCOPE
The lobbying framework should clearly and unambiguously define what is lobbying and
who is to be considered a lobbyist and lobbying target for the purposes of regulation.


Definitions
1.   ‘Lobbying’ – the term should cover any direct or indirect communication with a public
     official that is made, managed or directed with the purpose of influencing public
     decision-making.

2. ‘Public Official’ – shall include any individual with decision-making powers (and their
   advisors), who are elected, appointed or employed within the executive or legislative
   branches of power at national, sub-national, or supra-national levels; within private
   bodies performing public functions; and within public international organisations
   domiciled or operational in the country concerned.

3. ‘Lobbyist’ – should entail any natural or legal person who engages in lobbying activities,
   whether for private, public or collective ends, whether for compensation or without.

4. ‘Public decision-making’ – shall include the creation and amendment of legislation or
   any other regulatory measures; the development, modification and implementation of
   public policies, strategies and programmes; and the awarding of government contracts
   or grants, administrative decisions or any other public spending decisions.


Exceptions
5. Citizen interactions – the interaction of individual citizens with public officials
   concerning their private affairs shall not be considered lobbying, save for where it
   may concern individual economic interests of sufficient size or importance so as to
   potentially compromise public interest. In such case, a careful balancing act needs to be
   made on the respective benefit and efficacy of regulation, as well as due consideration
   given to any constitutional protections and guarantees.

6. Public officials, diplomats, political parties – if deemed necessary, the regulation may
   exclude public officials acting in their official capacity, diplomatic agents of foreign
   states and political parties (since they play a quasi-public role).




                                                                                                5
    TRANSPARENCY
    The lobbying interactions between lobbyists and public officials shall be transparent,
    increasing awareness on the operation of government, contributing to stakeholder
    participation and allowing for public confidence and oversight. The responsibility for
    transparency should be shared by the lobbyists and the public official, but it is public
    officials who must be accountable to the public for decisions taken.


    Lobbying Register
    1.        Mandatory register – the framework should require the establishment of a mandatory
              lobbying register to which the lobbyists, and all organisations who lobby whether by
              employing in-house or other lobbyists, must sign up in order to conduct their lobbying
              activities, and within which such activities are to be reported on a periodic basis along
              with any designated supplementary information.

    2. Timely registration and reporting – the initial lobbyist registration should take place in a
       timely fashion, before any lobbying activity takes place. Information should be updated
       shortly after any relevant changes occur. The frequency of activity reporting should be
       set with the aim of allowing for the meaningful analysis and intervention from other
       parties (minimum quarterly, ideally close to real-time).

    3. Information disclosed – among others, the register shall include information on:

         a. lobbyist identity

         b. the subject matter of lobbying activities and outcomes sought

         c. the ultimate beneficiary of lobbying activities (where relevant)

         d. the targeted institution and/or the public official concerned

         e. the type and frequency of lobbying activities

         f.     any supporting documentation shared with the public officials

         g. lobbying expenditure, including in-kind (calculated to set criteria, in cost bands, if
            need be)

         h. sources of funding, per client and per dossier

         i.     any political contributions, including in-kind

         j.     any prior roles as public official held by the individual and/or family members

         k. public funding received



6
4. Accessibility, openness and comparability of data – the information should be made
   available online, through a single website, free of charge, indexable and downloadable
   in full as machine readable open data (as per opendefinition.org). As far as possible,
   this data should conform to existing open data standards. A unique identifier shall
   be assigned to each lobbyist and organisation registered. Linking the information to
   other data sets, including those arising from proactive government disclosure, is highly
   recommended.

5. Minimal administrative burden – the system should allow for ease of registration and
   reporting, and look to minimise the administrative burden involved. The public sector
   obligations in terms of proactive disclosure and the public right to know should factor
   in achieving the right balance of mutual duties for lobbying transparency.


Public Access to Information
6. Access to information law – a comprehensive access to information law shall guarantee
   the public’s right of access to information, including information about lobbying.

7. Limited exceptions – the law should clearly set out a limited number of exceptions
   to address the privacy, security, financial sensitivity, decision-making process and any
   other legitimate concerns, which should be bound by a harm and public interest test
   applied in line with internationally accepted standards.

8. Proactive publication – the public bodies and officials should proactively publish
   their organisational, programmatic, administrative, financial, and business schedule
   information, summaries of meetings and other interactions with third parties, as well as
   any background documentation and preparatory analyses received or commissioned
   in the course of their work. These obligations shall also extend to the operation of any
   expert and consultative bodies convened by the public sector.

9. Decision-making footprint – where possible, and certainly for all legislative and
   policy initiatives, this information should be clustered around the individual items for
   consideration, producing a ‘decision-making footprint’, outlining the history, public
   engagement and overall process for the initiative. The footprint should also link to the
   lobbying register data.

10. Clear, Free and Comprehensive – all information must be made public without charge
    (excluding actual costs on delivery) and without limits to reuse. Any key information
    and analysis should be presented in a form that is accessible and comprehensible to
    both citizens and interest groups. All recently generated data proactively released shall
    be published as machine readable open data.


                                                                                                7
    INTEGRITY
    Both lobbyists and public officials should be subject to clear and enforceable standards of
    conduct and a system for managing conflicts of interest. The onus for proper behaviour
    shall sit with both parties; however the public officials shall have heightened responsibilities
    given their role as the holders of entrusted power.


    Public Officials
    1.        Codes of Conduct – all public officials shall have an applicable set of rules laying out the
              key standards of conduct, including for their dealings with third parties. Such rules may
              be institution dependent, but should include:

         a. Key behavioural principles including those of transparency, integrity, responsiveness,
            impartiality, fairness, accountability and serving the public interest

         b. The duty to keep a true and detailed record of their actions, including of meetings
            with lobbyists

         c. The duty to avoid lobbying contacts with unregistered lobbyists, and to report any
            violations of the lobbying rules to their superiors or relevant bodies

         d. The duty of confidentiality, subject to the public access to information regime

         e. A comprehensive mechanism for dealing with any real, potential or apparent conflicts
            of interest, including the incompatibilities of being a lobbyist

         f.     A comprehensive guidance for dealing with gifts and hospitality, including their
                registration or decline

         g. A system for assets and interests disclosure by the public official, as well as by their
            family and business partners depending on the scope of the decision-making power
            of the official.

    2. Post-employment restrictions – there should be a proportionate moratoria (or ‘cooling-
       off periods’) of at least 2 years before former public officials can lobby their former
       institutions concerning their prior duties. Approval from a designated ethics agency may
       be required before the public official can take up such a position.




8
3. Pre-employment restrictions – prospective public officials, excluding those elected into
   office, but particularly those hired or seconded into advisory and regulatory roles, shall
   be subject to a conflicts of interest vetting process that may necessitate their recusal or
   supervision for certain aspects of their activities, or a disqualification from the potential
   position. Omission to declare details that may be relevant for identifying potential
   conflicts of interests should trigger disciplinary procedures.


Lobbyists
4. Statutory code of conduct – there should be a statutory code of conduct for lobbyists
   developed in close consultation with all stakeholders and interested parties.

5. Behavioural standards – the code shall lay out the core behavioural standards,
   particularly with regards to honesty and the avoidance of undue influence.

6. Self-regulation – supplementary measures shall be taken to encourage lobbyists to
   voluntarily adopt, publicise and report on additional ethical commitments, including
   through collective action. Such commitments shall be backed by internal control
   and sanction mechanisms, and be integrated within their broader corporate social
   responsibility (CSR) and governance strategy.




                                                                                                   9
     PARTICIPATION & ACCESS
     Both pressure groups and the public at large should enjoy an open and fair access to public
     decision-making, allowing for a diversity of input, better policies, and ultimately more
     representative and trusted democracy.


     Public Participation in Decision-making
     1.   Right to participate – there should be a generally recognised right for all groups and
          public at large to participate in public decision-making, extending in particular to
          legislative and policy matters, within all levels of governance.

     2. Public consultation process – a legal framework should lay out in a law or a group of
        laws the varied means for public participation in the formulation, implementation,
        and evaluation of policies and laws, including timeframes and specific mechanisms to
        disseminate public meeting information, attendance and participation rules, instruments
        and tools to submit comments and opinion on specific policies.

     3. Equal opportunity – there shall be an obligation on public authorities to provide an
        equal opportunity for participation to various interest groups and the public at large.

     4. Timely and effective contribution – the public authorities should be obliged to
        provide an adequate time period for consultation allowing sufficient time for review
        of the preparatory materials under discussion, and should strive to promote effective
        participation at the appropriate stage, while decisions are still open.

     5. Publication of results – the (written and verbal) views of participants in the consultation
        process shall be made public, and the authorities should outline how the various views
        have been taken into account and why.

     6. Refusals of the right – the public authorities shall provide a written justification for
        any refusal of the right to participate, and those excluded shall have options available
        to challenge and contest that exclusion in a procedure that is expeditious enough to
        provide for participation in case the refusal is overturned.




10
Expert/Advisory Groups
7. Balanced composition – there should be a legal obligation on public authorities to strive
   for a balanced composition of expert and advisory bodies, representing a diversity of
   interests and views.

8. Disclosure of interests – advisory and expert group members shall be required to
   disclose their interests and affiliations relevant to items under consideration in advance
   of any work on the issue.


Lobbyist incentives
9. Lobbyist incentives – any lobbyist incentives should be considered with care, so as not
   to entrench special privilege of organised interests over those of individual citizens.




                                                                                                11
     OVERSIGHT, MANAGEMENT AND
     SANCTIONS
     There should be sufficient oversight and support for the operation of lobbying regulations,
     as well as effective sanctions for cases of violation

     1.        Management & Investigation – an independent, mandated and well-resourced
               oversight body or coordinated mechanism should be charged with:

          a. managing lobbying registration

          b. reviewing potential conflicts of interest

          c. collating and disseminating the locations of proactively disclosed information

          d. monitoring compliance (including pro-active verification and spot-audits of reports)

          e. following up on complaints

          f.     investigating apparent breaches and anomalies

          g. consulting on and defining further regulatory provisions where there is a mandate

     2. Advice, analysis and awareness raising – this body or mechanism should also offer
        guidance and training to lobbyists and public officials on the application of relevant
        laws, analyse trends and report on their findings, raise awareness among the public and
        the profession on recent developments; and promote best practice in the sector.

     3. Complaint mechanism – there should be a well-publicised complaint mechanism
        that allows anyone to report violations either openly, confidentially or anonymously
        and to be informed on the specific outcome of the complaint, subject to any privacy
        limitations.

     4. Sanctions – lobbyists and public officials shall be subject to effective, proportionate and
        dissuasive sanctions for the violation of lobbying rules. These sanctions should have
        a sliding scale, including the threat of criminal sanctions, (temporary) de-registration,
        and disciplinary proceedings for public officials. Those sanctioned may have their name
        and employer information published. Public sector contracts concluded in violation
        of essential regulations could be deemed null and void where appropriate. Personal
        liability should attach to the leadership of organisations where they are found to have
        consented to or connived in the commission of the offence.




12
REGULATORY FRAMEWORK DESIGN
Lobbying regulations should take into account the local context, and be aligned with the
broader regulatory and policy framework in place.

1.        Local context – insofar as it is not contrary to the guiding principles, the lobbying
          regulations should address the particularities of the local context, including any
          socio-political considerations (such as presence of ‘corporatism’, or formalised social
          partnerships); the degree of informal and professional lobbying; and the nature of public
          concerns that potentially give rise to regulation.

2. Broader regulatory framework – the design of lobbying regulations necessitates a
   thorough review, consistency with and potential amendment of the broader regulatory
   framework, else the entirety of lobbying regulation may prove futile. This concerns in
   particular the laws and policies on:

     a. trading in influence, bribery and other corrupt conduct

     b. political finance (limits and transparency) and sponsoring of election candidates or
        parties

     c. public procurement and state benefits (due process and supervision mechanisms)

     d. media law (independence and sponsorship)

     e. labour law (collective bargaining)

     f.     whistle-blower protection

     g. legislative procedure (including bringing of items under urgency)

     h. judicial and administrative review

     i.     rights to freedom of speech, assembly and petition of government

3. Periodic review – the regulatory framework should be subject to an initial review one
   year after the commencement of the legislation and following that, further periodic
   review for its effectiveness and compliance with guiding principles.




                                                                                                      13
lobbyingtransparency.net
