                           LEGAL REGULATION
                      OF LOBBYING ACTIVITIES
                    IN THE CONTEXT OF PUBLIC
                            DECISION MAKING




Legal instruments       Recommendation CM/Rec(2017)2
                          and explanatory memorandum
                LEGAL REGULATION
           OF LOBBYING ACTIVITIES
         IN THE CONTEXT OF PUBLIC
                 DECISION MAKING




Recommendation CM/Rec(2017)2
adopted by the Committee of Ministers
of the Council of Europe
on 22 March 2017
and explanatory memorandum




                                        Council of Europe
                          French edition:
        La réglementation juridique des
  activités de lobbying dans le contexte
         de la prise de décision publique
    (Recommandation CM/Rec(2017)2
                     et exposé des motifs)
               ISBN 978-92-871-8438-2
      Reproduction of the texts in this
    publication is authorised provided
   the full title and the source, namely
     the Council of Europe, are cited. If
      they are intended to be used for
    commercial purposes or translated
into one of the non-official languages
       of the Council of Europe, please
            contact publishing@coe.int.
            Cover design and layout:
         Documents and Publications
             Production Department
           (SPDP), Council of Europe
         Council of Europe Publishing
           F-67075 Strasbourg Cedex
                   http://book.coe.int
              ISBN 978-92-871-8439-9
       © Council of Europe, July 2017
      Printed at the Council of Europe
         Contents
RECOMMENDATION CM/REC(2017)2                                                                5
EXPLANATORY MEMORANDUM                                                                     11
         Introduction                                                                      11
         Definitions                                                                       15
         A. Objective of legal regulation                                                  20
         B. Activities subject to legal regulation                                         20
         C. Freedom of expression, political activities and participation in public life   22
         D. Transparency                                                                   23
         E. Public registers of lobbyists                                                  24
         F. Standards of ethical behaviour for lobbyists                                   28
         G. Sanctions                                                                      29
         H. Public sector integrity                                                        30
         I. Oversight, advice and awareness                                                32
         J. Review                                                                         33




                                                                                   ► Page 3
            Recommendation
            CM/Rec(2017)2
             of the Committee of Ministers
             to member States on the legal
             regulation of lobbying activities
             in the context of public
             decision making
             (Adopted by the Committee of Ministers on 22 March 2017
             at the 1282nd meeting of the Ministers’ Deputies)

The Committee of Ministers, under the terms of Article 15.b of the Statute of
the Council of Europe,
Considering that the aim of the Council of Europe is to achieve a greater unity
between its members for the purpose, inter alia, of safeguarding and realising
the ideals and principles which are their common heritage;
Considering that adopting common rules in legal matters can contribute to
the achievement of the aforementioned aim;
Considering that the right to participate in public affairs is one of the demo-
cratic principles shared by all member States of the Council of Europe;
Recognising that lobbying can make a legitimate contribution to open gov-
ernment and well-informed public decision making;
Recognising that increasing transparency and accountability in lobbying can
strengthen public confidence in political systems;
Recognising that regulating lobbying can strengthen its legitimacy and integrity
and provide a transparent framework in which stakeholders can contribute
to public decision making;


                                                                        ► Page 5
Recognising that regulating lobbying activities should not prevent the con-
sideration of technical advice or individual opinions in the process of public
decision making;
Recognising that the European Court of Human Rights has established a
right of access to information as an inherent part of the right to freedom of
expression protected by Article 10 of the European Convention on Human
Rights (ETS No. 5);
Having regard to the Criminal Law Convention on Corruption (ETS No. 173),
the Civil Law Convention on Corruption (ETS No. 174), Recommendation
Rec(2000)10 of the Committee of Ministers to member States on codes of
conduct for public officials, and the work of the Group of States against
Corruption (GRECO);
Having regard to the Convention for the Protection of Individuals with regard
to Automatic Processing of Personal Data (ETS No. 108) and the principles on
protecting personal data contained therein;
Recalling Parliamentary Assembly Recommendation 1908 (2010) on “Lobbying
in a democratic society (European code of good conduct on lobbying)” – reiter-
ated by Resolution 1744 (2010) on “Extra-institutional actors in the democratic
system” and Recommendation 2019 (2013) on “Corruption as a threat to the
rule of law” – in which the Assembly recommends that the Committee of
Ministers of the Council of Europe draw up a European code of good conduct
on lobbying;
Taking note of the OECD’s “Recommendation of the Council on Principles for
Transparency and Integrity in Lobbying” (C(2016)16);
Recognising and valuing the work of civil society organisations and other
bodies seeking to promote transparency in lobbying;
Noting that many member States of the Council of Europe have rules gov-
erning conflicts of interest, access to public officials and transparency of the
legislative process, but most of them have no comprehensive framework for
the regulation of lobbying;
Bearing in mind that any national lobbying regulation should comply with
national constitutional law;
Considering that there is a need to encourage the adoption of such frameworks,
based on common principles, in the member States,


Page 6 ► Legal regulation of lobbying activities
Recommends that governments of member States:
     –   establish or further strengthen, as the case may be, a coherent and
         comprehensive framework for the legal regulation of lobbying activities
         in the context of public decision making, in accordance with the guiding
         principles contained in the appendix hereto and in the light of their own
         national circumstances;
     –   ensure that this recommendation is translated and disseminated as widely
         as possible and more specifically among lobbying groups, business, trade
         unions, industry confederations, public bodies, regulatory authorities,
         civil society NGOs, politicians, academics.


Appendix to Recommendation CM/Rec(2017)2

Guiding principles on devising policy at national level
to regulate lobbying
Definitions

For the purposes of this recommendation and its principles:

a.   “lobbying” means promoting specific interests by communication with a
public official as part of a structured and organised action aimed at influencing
public decision making;

b.       “lobbyist” means any natural or legal person who engages in lobbying;

c.   “public decision making” means decision making within the legislative
and executive branches, whether at national, regional or local level;

d.   “public official” means any person exercising a public function, whether
elected, employed or otherwise, in the legislative or executive branches;

e.    “legal regulation” means statutory regulation, a system of self-regulation
or a combination of both.

A. Objective of legal regulation

1.   Legal regulation of lobbying should promote the transparency of lob-
bying activities.


                                            Recommendation CM/Rec(2017)2 ► Page 7
B. Activities subject to legal regulation
2.    Lobbying activities in at least the following categories should be subject
to legal regulation:
   a. consultant lobbyists acting on behalf of a third party;
   b. in-house lobbyists acting on behalf of their employer;
   c. organisations or bodies representing professional or other sectoral
      interests.
3.   Exemptions to legal regulations on lobbying should be clearly defined
and justified.

C. Freedom of expression, political activities and participation
   in public life
4.  Legal regulation of lobbying activities should not, in any form or manner
whatsoever, infringe the democratic right of individuals to:
   a. express their opinions and petition public officials, bodies and institutions,
      whether individually or collectively;
   b. campaign for political change and change in legislation, policy or practice
      within the framework of legitimate political activities, individually or
      collectively.

D. Transparency
5.  Information on lobbying activities in the context of public decision-
making processes should be disclosed.
6.   The rules on disclosure should be proportionate to the importance of
the subject matter of the public decision-making process and should reflect
constitutional guarantees.

E. Public registers of lobbyists
7.   A register of lobbyists should be maintained by public authorities or
other designated bodies.
8.   Information held in the register should be of a declaratory character.
Lobbyists should be responsible for ensuring the information is accurate and
up to date.


Page 8 ► Legal regulation of lobbying activities
9.    The register should be easily accessible and user-friendly. It should be
available online with easy-to-use search facilities, open to the public, and
consultation should be free of charge.

10. The processing of personal data from the register should comply with
applicable standards on personal data protection.

11.   Information held in the register should include as a minimum:
  a. the name and contact details of the lobbyist;
  b. the subject matter of the lobbying activities;
  c. the identity of the client or employer, where applicable.

12. In order to further promote transparency, registers may include additional
information in accordance with national conditions and requirements.

13. In the case where a member State can demonstrate that alternative
mechanisms guarantee public access to information on lobbying activities
and ensure equivalent levels of accessibility and transparency, it may be
considered that the requirement for a public register is satisfied.

F. Standards of ethical behaviour for lobbyists

14. Lobbyists should be guided by the principles of openness, transparency,
honesty and integrity. In particular, they should be expected to:
  a. provide accurate and correct information on their lobbying assignment
     to the public official concerned;
  b. act honestly and in good faith in relation to the lobbying assignment
     and in all contact with public officials;
  c. refrain from undue and improper influence over public officials and the
     public decision-making process;
  d. avoid conflicts of interest.

G. Sanctions

15. Legal regulations on lobbying should contain sanctions for non-
compliance. These sanctions should be effective, proportionate and dissuasive.


                                        Recommendation CM/Rec(2017)2 ► Page 9
H. Public sector integrity
16. Appropriate measures tailored to national circumstances should be in
place in order to avoid risks to public sector integrity that might be created
by lobbying activities.
17. The measures referred to in the preceding paragraph could include:
   a. a “cooling-off” period, namely a period of time that has to elapse before
      either a public official may become a lobbyist after leaving public
      employment or office, or a lobbyist may become a public official after
      ceasing lobbying activities;
   b. guidance to public officials on their relations with lobbyists, in particular
      concerning:
      - refusing or disclosing the receipt of gifts and hospitality offered by
          a lobbyist;
      - how to respond to communications from lobbyists;
      - reporting violations of the regulations or rules of conduct on lobbying
          activities;
      - disclosing conflicts of interest;
      - preserving the confidentiality of data.

I. Oversight, advice and awareness
18. Oversight of the regulations on lobbying activities should be entrusted
to designated public authorities.
19. Oversight may include the following tasks:
   a. monitoring compliance with the regulations;
   b. providing guidance to lobbyists and public officials on the application
      of the regulations;
   c. raising awareness among lobbyists, public officials and the public.

J. Review
20. The framework for the legal regulation of lobbying activities should be
kept under review.




Page 10 ► Legal regulation of lobbying activities
              Explanatory
              memorandum
Introduction
1.    The objective of the recommendation is to promote and increase trans-
parency of lobbying activities in public decision making. It goes beyond
commercial lobbying and concerns all forms of lobbying on public decision
making. Moreover, the premise is much broader, recognising lobbying as a
legitimate, and certainly not an illicit, activity. Indeed, lobbying is considered
as an important and legitimate part of the democratic process within politi-
cal systems.1 It concerns the activities of all social actors, public and private.
This has important implications as it means that the recommendation is not
only concerned with paid, professional lobbyists acting on behalf of private
business interests. Rather, it encompasses the activities of civil society, and
of any other person or body that lobbies public officials. As stated by the
Parliamentary Assembly of the Council of Europe:
     [E]xtra-institutional actors, including interest and pressure groups, trade unions
     and consumer organisations, are a part of a democratic society. Their lobbying
     activities are not illegitimate per se and can be beneficial for the functioning of a
     democratic political system. However, unregulated and non-transparent lobbying
     may undermine democratic principles and good governance. Citizens should
     know which actors influence the making of political decisions.2



  1. A “political system” is defined by David Easton as having four main elements. The first is
     a set of institutions, each with defined responsibilities, such as the executive, legislature,
     and bureaucracies. The second refers to the “inputs” to such institutions, which are both
     political parties and interest groups. The third refers to “outputs” which emanate from the
     institutions, particularly public policies. The fourth is the feedback mechanism, where the
     “outputs” that have a social and economic impact on citizens ultimately impact on new
     “inputs” in the political system. See Easton D. (1953), The Political System: An Inquiry into
     the State of Political Science, Alfred A. Knopf, New York.
  2. Parliamentary Assembly Resolution 2125 (2016) on transparency and openness in European
     Institutions.



                                                                                        ► Page 11
With this in mind, the definition of what constitutes lobbying activities for the
purposes of the recommendation is of crucial importance in order to ensure
that the legitimate rights to freedom of expression are fully respected and
facilitated.


2.    Lobbying activities appear to have been increasing in Council of Europe
member States, certainly as concerns commercial lobbying. An attempt by
lobbyists to influence public actors may take place in many ways, including,
for example, written communications with individual public officials, presen-
tations to groups of public officials, draft reports to public administrations,
or even telephone calls. The aim of lobbying may be to seek to shape a new
public policy with a view to benefiting a particular group or interest or, on
the contrary, prevent the formulation or adoption of a new one in order to
maintain the status quo. The attempt to influence may or may not be suc-
cessful – it is the act itself, of private actors attempting to influence public
actors, that is significant. It is well established that in all democratic political
systems lobbyists exert a strong influence when public policy is formulated
and public decisions are made.3 The number of lobbyists active in the politi-
cal system will vary between States and their specific political cultures. Their
importance lies in their intimate knowledge of national political processes
and in their ability to harness this knowledge in the interest of their clients
or of the interests they represent. Moreover, the complexity of the decisions
that public officials must make in a modern democratic State in terms of their
economic and social impact, sometimes concerning millions of people, often
means that public officials may actively consult with and ask for submissions
from various interest groups. As a result there is growing public concern over
lobbying activities and a wish for the work of lobbyists to be transparent.


3.    In light of the legitimate role of lobbying in public life, lobbying regula-
tions should seek to strengthen its transparency and accountability. The chal-
lenges and the impact of lobbying on public decision making are significant
and this inevitably requires regulation, which only a limited number of Council
of Europe member States have adopted to date. Several authors have written

   3. See, for example, Dahl R. (1961), Who Governs? Democracy and Power in an American City,
      Yale University Press, New Haven, CT; and Baumgartner F. R., Berry J. M., Hojnacki M.,
      Kimball D. C. and Leech B. L. (2009), Lobbying and Policy Change, University of Chicago
      Press, Chicago.



Page 12 ► Legal regulation of lobbying activities
on the theme of lobbying regulation4 and it is generally accepted that the
term “regulation of lobbying” refers to the idea that political systems have
established “rules” which lobbyists must follow when trying to influence public
officials and the nature of public policy outputs. Such rules increase transpar-
ency. Democratic principles and good governance can be undermined in the
absence of regulation. Attention is drawn to the fact that lobbying regulations
envisaged in the recommendation do not concern corruption. Corruption is
a criminal act, and so falls outside their scope. Moreover, Council of Europe
member States already have specific rules in this respect.
4.    By giving individuals greater awareness of the process of public decision
making in particular cases and of what influences are brought to bear on the
final outcomes, promoting transparency and accountability through lobby-
ing regulations can also contribute to a more general strengthening of public
confidence in political systems. Such regulations can bolster the legitimacy of
the political system, counter the decline in public confidence in many States,
and even serve as a basis for wider public participation in public life and public
decision making. It is important to note that civil society organisations have
themselves also worked and sought to increase transparency in lobbying
activities.5
5.     Lobbying regulations may also provide a more level playing field for
everyone. Shining light on lobbying activity ensures that all actors – from
citizens, to stakeholders, politicians and civil servants – are equally aware of
when public policy is being shaped, about what, and who is lobbying whom.
This will make political players even more accountable. This does not neces-
sarily mean that all lobbyists will be able to exert the same influence.
6.   The recommendation complements the OECD Principles for Transparency
and Integrity in Lobbying, the first principle of which states that: “Countries

  4. For various contributions to the lobbying regulation literature, see Zeller B. (1958), “Regulation
     of Pressure Groups and Lobbyists”, Annals of the American Academy of Political and Social
     Sciences, Vol. 319, pp. 94-103; Stark A. (1992), “‘Political Discourse’ Analysis and the Debate
     over Canada’s Lobbying Legislation”, Canadian Journal of Political Science, Vol. 25, No. 3,
     pp. 513-534; Bouwen P. (2003), “A Theoretical and Empirical Study of Corporate Lobbying in
     the European Parliament”, European Integration online Papers (EIoP), Vol. 7, No. 11; Galkowski J.
     (2008), “Poland’s Experience: Developing and Implementing the Act on Legislative and
     Regulatory Lobbying” in Lobbyists, Government and Public Trust, OECD, Paris.
  5. For a recent analysis by Transparency International, see “Lobbying Regulation in Europe”
     (2015). Another example of an organisation which has called for increased transparency
     in lobbying is Alter-EU, whose letter to the EU Commission in May 2015 also highlights
     the plethora of groups that are calling for full transparency.



                                                           Explanatory memorandum ► Page 13
should provide a level playing field by granting all stakeholders fair and
equitable access to the development and implementation of public policies.”
Principle 2 also stipulates that: “Rules and guidelines on lobbying should
address the governance concerns related to lobbying practices, and respect
socio-political and administrative contexts”.6

7.    In 2010, the Parliamentary Assembly of the Council of Europe called for
“honest lobbying […] so as to improve the public image of persons involved
in these activities”.7 At the same time it called on the Committee of Ministers
to draw up a European Code on the good conduct of lobbying which would
be based, inter alia, on the principle that “rules applicable to […] members of
pressure groups and businesses should be laid down, including the principle
of potential conflicts of interest”. This recommendation is the response of the
Committee of Ministers to that call.

8.   The recommendation is addressed to member States of the Council of
Europe and outlines guiding principles on devising policy at national level to
regulate lobbying, having regard to freedom of expression, political activities
and participation in public life, transparency, public registers of lobbyists,
standards of ethical behaviour for lobbyists, sanctions, public sector integrity,
oversight, advice and awareness, and review. It is for member States to decide
how best to apply these principles in light of their specific national context
and circumstances.

9.    The recommendation was prepared by the European Committee on
Legal Co-operation (CDCJ) at the request of the Committee of Ministers of the
Council of Europe. This work included consultation with relevant stakehold-
ers from among lobbying groups, regulators and civil society, the results of
which were considered by the CDCJ before completing its work and submit-
ting the recommendation to the Committee of Ministers for adoption. This
consultation comprised two elements. Firstly, the CDCJ conducted a written
consultation of over 500 persons from whom replies were received, cover-
ing a good geographical mix of 24 Council of Europe member States, from
Transparency International national branches, lobbyists, trade unions and
industry confederations, academics, regulatory authorities and civil society
NGOs. Secondly, it held a one-day hearing of representatives of 12 key actors

   6. OECD (2013), “Transparency and Integrity in Lobbying”, OECD, Paris, pp. 3-5 for a full list of
      the 10 principles, available at www.oecd.org/corruption/ethics/Lobbying-Brochure.pdf.
   7. Parliamentary Assembly Recommendation 1908 (2010) on lobbying in a democratic society
      (European code of good conduct on lobbying), paragraph 11.6.



Page 14 ► Legal regulation of lobbying activities
from civil society, business, lobbyists and public bodies. The meeting took
place in Strasbourg on 14 June 2016. This event allowed key stakeholders to
exchange views and experience in this area and provide input to the drawing
up of the recommendation.


Definitions
Lobbying
10. There is no universally accepted definition of lobbying. Franck R.
Baumgartner and Beth L. Leech have pointed out that “the word lobbying
has seldom been used the same way twice by those studying the topic”.8
They define lobbying as “an effort to influence the policy process”,9 while A. J.
Nownes states that “lobbying is an effort designed to affect what the govern-
ment does.”10
11. The term “lobbying” is understood in this recommendation as promoting
specific interests by communication with a public official as part of a structured
and organised action aimed at influencing public decision making. A specific
interest may represent a “private” interest, such as a corporation which may wish
to see their public policy preferences reflected in legislation. Alternatively, a
specific interest may be representative of a more “public” concern, for example
regarding environmental issues. A “structured and organised action” can be
understood as a deliberate, planned, methodical or co-ordinated strategy lob-
byists pursue in order to influence policy and promote their policy position,
usually supported by an infrastructural or organisational apparatus. It is this
element that crucially distinguishes lobbying from other acts of influence,
or attempted influence. Even though these acts may concern the process of
public decision making, they are distinguishable from lobbying because they
are isolated, unstructured and/or spontaneous; that is, they do not form part
of a pre-determined plan.

12. It is important to note that the focus of the recommendation is on what
constitutes lobbying activities rather than on identifying who is a lobbyist. This
means that the recommendation covers both business-for-profit lobbyists and

   8. Baumgartner F. R. and Leech B. L. (1998), Basic Interests: The Importance of Groups on Politics
      and in Political Science, Princeton University Press, Princeton, NJ, p. 33.
   9. Ibid., p. 34.
  10. Nownes A. J. (2006), Total Lobbying: What Lobbyists Want (and How They Try to Get It),
      Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, p. 5.



                                                          Explanatory memorandum ► Page 15
civil society organisations that lobby in the public interest. Take, for example,
a highway construction project. The public authority is likely to be subjected
to pressure from both business and civil society. Business lobbyists might
include construction companies wishing to bid for the construction contract
and local businesses that would benefit from the development. Both these
business interests would lobby in favour of the road construction for their
own economic interests. Civil society organisations, on the other hand, might
include two opposing groups. Firstly, a group of local residents who might
benefit from better transport links and who would therefore lobby in favour
of the construction project. Secondly, environmental associations concerned
about the impact on the environment or wildlife and who would lobby against
the project. Both the construction companies and the residents and environ-
mental associations would seek to influence the decision-making process,
even though the companies’ aim would be to increase their revenue while
the civil society actors would be defending either public or private interest.
13.   Lobbying may take many forms. Some examples are given below:
   – offering advice or making presentations to officials, either on an occasional
     or a regular basis;
   – submitting reports to public officials in which specific details for a pro-
     posed policy are drafted;
   – pursuing informal contacts with politicians or civil servants (for example,
     lunch appointments, impromptu visits, telephone calls);
   – sending directed messages via social media or otherwise sending solicited
     or unsolicited information or documents;
   – participating in public (open) or restricted (closed) consultations;
   – participating in formal consultation through institutionalised channels;
   – participating in hearings, such as parliamentary committees;
   – participating in a delegation or conference.

Lobbyist
14. There is no universally accepted definition of lobbyist. Academics such
as K. G. Hunter et al. argue that a lobbyist is “someone who attempts to affect
legislative action,”11 while Raj Chari, John Hogan and Gary Murphy define

   11. Hunter K. G., Wilson L. A. and Brunk G. G. (1991), “Societal Complexity and Interest-Group
       Lobbying in the American States”, The Journal of Politics, Vol. 53, No. 2, p. 490.



Page 16 ► Legal regulation of lobbying activities
lobbyists as “individuals or groups, each with varying and specific interests
that seek to influence decisions at the political level”.12
15. The term “lobbyist” is understood in this recommendation as any natural
or legal person who engages in lobbying when public decisions are made. This
definition covers lobbying activities whether for private, public or collective
ends, whether for compensation or without, as specified by Transparency
International in its international standards for lobbying regulation.13 Lobbyists
and the interests they defend are innumerable. Everyday examples include:
a consultant lobbyist acting on behalf of a third party that seeks increased
liberalisation of the telecommunications sector; a corporation (with the sup-
port of an “in-house” lobbyist) directly lobbying to reduce corporate tax rates;
a farming association lobbying to ensure maximum subsidies for agricultural
goods; or an environmental group that lobbies for legislation to restrict carbon
emissions.
16. It should be noted that in some cases public corporations, such as electri-
city companies, petroleum companies or airlines, which are under full or partial
State ownership, may also be involved in lobbying when public decisions are
made, such as on liberalisation initiatives in their sector or regarding approval
of mergers and acquisitions. It will be for each State to determine whether it
is appropriate for these interests to be covered by national legal regulations
on lobbying.

Public decision making
17. The term “public decision making” in the recommendation refers to any
decision made within the legislative and executive branches. In this context,
the executive branch includes not only the government itself, but also the
individual ministries along with regional and local authorities. Public decision
making which is typically the object of lobbying includes, but is not limited
to:
  – the development of any legislative proposal;
  – the introduction, amendment, passage or defeat of any bill or regulation;
  – the preparation or amendment of any policy programme;

  12. Chari R., Hogan J. and Murphy G. (2012), Regulating Lobbying – A Global Comparison,
      Manchester University Press, Manchester, p. 4.
  13. Transparency International, “International standards for lobbying regulation: Towards
      greater transparency, integrity and participation”, available at lobbyingtransparency.net/.



                                                        Explanatory memorandum ► Page 17
   – the award or withdrawal of a contract, grant, licence, contribution, or
     other benefit (for example financial or in kind, such as a nomination for
     a public body appointment).

18. Lobbying can take place in any policy area in which public decisions are
made. These decisions can be made at national, regional or local level and
lobbying can target different categories of public officials at these levels. At
local level, for instance, there may be important decisions to be made with
regard to land development or zoning.

Public official
19. For the purposes of this recommendation, the term “public official” refers
to those who exercise a public function, whether elected, employed or other-
wise. This is a large group and includes members of the executive branch,
members of parliament or legislative assembly, civil servants, and advisors
to elected officials (the latter being policy makers even though they are not
civil servants).

Legal regulation
20. It is for each member State to determine the appropriate type of scheme
and legislative approach for the regulation of lobbying activities in light of
their specific national context and circumstances.

21. Schemes of “statutory regulation” comprise rules established by legisla-
tion and which are binding on lobbyists and, as appropriate, public officials
who have contact with them. Such systems will include sanctions in the event
of a breach of their rules, whether administrative or criminal, and may vary
from warnings to fines and potentially, in some cases, prison. Statutory regula-
tion schemes are the norm for those States that have introduced regulatory
frameworks on lobbying.

22. “Self-regulation” schemes allow for lobbyists to regulate themselves and to
provide for sanctions. The threat of sanctions imposed on members facilitates
compliance with such schemes. Codes of conduct adopted by associations
of professional lobbyists are a typical feature of political systems that have
not opted for a regulatory scheme. Sanctions in a self-regulation scheme will
generally be lighter than those of a statutory scheme, possibly in the form
of restrictions in professional practice or suspension from the professional
association.


Page 18 ► Legal regulation of lobbying activities
23. In practice, in most States, there is a combination of both types of
regulation with a varying mix of statutory and self-regulation. Even schemes
with a high regulatory content usually include some voluntary components.
This diversity is illustrated by the differing treatment of codes of conduct in
different national schemes, as can be seen in the following examples.
  – In the United Kingdom there is a combination of statutory14 and self-
    regulation governing lobbying. There are three self-regulatory bodies
    for public affairs practitioners – the Association of Professional Political
    Consultants (APPC), the Public Relations Consultants Association
    (PRCA) and the Chartered Institute of Public Relations – which include
    consultancies, trade associations, in-house public affairs and public
    relations teams and individual lobbyists.
  – In Germany, on the one hand, there is a regulatory scheme for lobbying
    activities targeting the federal parliament. On the other hand, professional
    associations have implemented national-level voluntary codes of conduct
    for lobbyists. The Deutsche Gesellschaft für Politikberatung (German
    Association of Political Consultants) considers that lobbying is an essential
    part of the interaction between citizens and their government, and
    that it needs to be open and transparent. Accordingly, it requires all its
    members to sign up to its code of conduct.15
  – In Austria, in order to encourage lobbyists to uphold ethical values, core
    standards are laid down by law and lobbyists are obliged to include these
    standards in their code of conduct.
  – In Lithuania, the statutory regulation governs all lobbying rules, including
    the need for and content of codes of conduct.16
24. Regulation of lobbying by public law can follow one of two approaches.
One approach is to have specific legislation, such as a law on lobbying (see for
example, “the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia”). A second approach
is for non-targeted regulation spread across relevant laws; for example, rules
on conflicts of interest in legislation relating to civil servants, parliamentary
rules of procedure including a register for lobbyists, and regulating contacts
between government officials and lobbyists in ministerial rules. In addition,
provisions relevant to the regulation of lobbying can exist at four levels: at

  14. Transparency of Lobbying, Non-Party Campaigning and Trade Union Administration Act
      (2014), available at www.legislation.gov.uk/ukpga/2014/4/pdfs/ukpga_20140004_en.pdf.
  15. For information on the German Association of Political Consultants, see www.degepol.
      com/pageen/.
  16. See Article 13(1)(4) of the Lithuanian Law on lobbying.



                                                    Explanatory memorandum ► Page 19
the constitutional level, for example with a regulation on incompatibilities
(Montenegro) or on transparency of the legislative process (Germany); at the
sub-constitutional level with laws, for example civil service laws on conflicts
of interest (Poland); at the level of self-regulation of public bodies, such as
parliamentary rules of procedure (France, Germany) or government decrees
for ministries (Hungary); or at the level of rules issued by government agen-
cies, for example a code of conduct issued by an anti-corruption commission
(Montenegro). In terms of sectors, one regulation might cover all sectors, or
there may be specific regulations for different sectors, for example the execu-
tive (Hungary) or the legislature (France).17


A. Objective of legal regulation
Principle 1
25. The main aim of the recommendation is to promote transparency in
lobbying. This recognises the legitimacy of lobbying but also the need to
ensure that, as far as possible, it does not take place “behind closed doors”.
Transparency must enable the public to monitor contacts and communications
between lobbyists and public officials and their involvement in the public
decision-making process. As a result, it should be possible to clearly identify
all interests that influence the outcome of the process. Transparency not only
increases public officials’ responsiveness to public demands, but also helps to
prevent misconduct and fight corruption. One of the main indirect benefits of
transparency is to improve the democratic quality of life and equal access to
public decision-making processes. The more engaged citizens are, the more
likely they are to see public institutions as being legitimate. A mandatory reg-
ister (as described in Part E), together with disclosure (as described in Part D),
are the main tools for achieving transparency in lobbying activities. Together
they represent the cornerstone of this recommendation.


B. Activities subject to legal regulation
Principle 2
26. Principle 2 identifies three categories of persons or organisations engaged
in lobbying that should be the subject of legal regulation, namely consultant

   17. See French Law No. 2016-1691 of 9 December 2016 on Transparency, the Fight against
       Corruption, and Economic Modernisation, which covers all public authorities.



Page 20 ► Legal regulation of lobbying activities
lobbyists, in-house lobbyists and organisations representing professional or
sectoral interests. Examples of what these categories might comprise are given
below.
   a. Consultant lobbyists act on behalf of, and are paid by, a third party.
      Third parties that hire consultants include, for example, corporations,
      professional associations and NGOs. In some cases, a consultant lobbyist
      may waive their fee, for example to support a charitable cause, but any
      lobbying that might be done on behalf of the charity should still be
      subject to regulation.
   b. In-house lobbyists act on behalf of their employer or organisation. A
      typical example is a corporation that has a dedicated team of public
      relations and public affairs officials working in-house in order to directly
      lobby for the corporation. NGOs and civil society organisations may also
      have in-house lobbyists, whether staff members or volunteers, whose
      role may be either occasional or structural depending on the extent and
      nature of the organisation’s lobbying activities.
   c. Organisations or bodies that represent different professions or other
      sectoral interests also engage in lobbying in order to protect or promote
      their interests. Such organisations include trade unions, employers’
      organisations, NGOs and civil society organisations more generally,
      including professional associations.
27. The three categories referred to in the recommendation cover the vast
majority, if not all, of the different types of lobbyists, and reflect the broad
range of their activities in democratic societies, including:
   – professional consultancies, law firms, self-employed consultants;
   – in-house lobbyists and trade, business and professional associations;
   – NGOs and civil society organisations (such as human rights and environ-
     mental associations);
   – think tanks, research and academic institutions;
   – organisations representing religious institutions.18

Principle 3
28. Member States may establish exemptions from the legal regulations for
certain categories of lobbying activities, provided that they are clearly defined

  18. European Union Joint Transparency Register, available at http://ec.europa.eu/transparen-
      cyregister/public/homePage.do.



                                                      Explanatory memorandum ► Page 21
and justified. Under the recent Irish lobbying law, for example, the rules regu-
lating lobbying do not apply to lobbying by or on behalf of another State, the
European Union, and the United Nations, or to communications requesting
factual information or those related to security issues.19 In Austria, Australia,
Canada and the United States, diplomatic and consular activities (namely,
communications made on behalf of a government of a foreign country) are
similarly exempted from legal regulations.
29. Exemptions should be clearly laid out to prevent lobbyists and public
officials from abusing them. For example, the laws used in a number of States
provide that an invitation by a government to speak to officials is not considered
as lobbying, and the person involved is therefore not required to register.
However, there is a risk that this exemption may be abused by a person taking
advantage of the invitation to speak with an official to also promote her or
his own agenda. Should this happen the underlying reason for the exemp-
tion would be undermined and an act of lobbying would remain undisclosed
under the pretence of an exempted communication with an official.20


C. Freedom of expression, political activities and
   participation in public life
Principle 4
30. It is fundamental that regulations on lobbying should not in any way,
form or manner infringe on the right of any citizen, as an individual or part
of a collective, to express their opinions and petition public officials, bodies
or institutions. Such a right also includes that of campaigning for or against
change in legislation, policy or practice. This should be explicitly stated in
the lobbying regulation. If not, people may be deterred from exercising their
democratic right to express their opinions and participate in the political

   19. See Section 5.5 of the Irish Regulation of Lobbying Act, available at www.oireachtas.ie/
       documents/bills28/acts/2015/a515.pdf.
   20. This was observed, for example, in Canada where many lobbyists at the federal level stated
       that they did not need to register because the 1989 and 1995 acts stated that only lobbyists
       who “sought to influence were required to register, but that those asked by the govern-
       ment to give information were not. An obvious loophole in this regard was for a lobbyist
       to say that he/she was “asked” by the government to give information when a decision
       was being made; the lobbyist could then claim that he/she did not seek to influence per
       se. Bill C-15 closed this loophole in 2003 by amending the Lobbyists Registration Act to
       make all forms of communication, whether solicited or not by the government, subject
       to registration by all lobbyists.



Page 22 ► Legal regulation of lobbying activities
activity of the State for fear that it is prohibited by the lobbying regulation. If
these rights are not explicitly protected in legislation, this may undermine civil
society participation and, more generally, democratic discourse and exchange
of opinions on important matters.

D. Transparency
Principle 5
31. Disclosure of lobbying activities is fundamental to make the decision-
making process transparent. Timely release of lobbying data is critical, in order
to allow for meaningful public oversight and intervention. This information
should be easily accessible. Member States are free to determine who bears
the burden of disclosing information related to lobbying. Member States
also have discretion to select the methods they consider most effective and
appropriate for their national context and circumstances. Although Principle
5 does not specify the various ways in which the activities of lobbyists can be
made transparent for the benefit of the public, they are possibly as important
as the register of lobbyists (Part E).
32. Disclosure can take place in several ways, depending on the particular
process and subject matter, and on the political culture and traditions. These
include, for example, establishing “legislative footprints” that track all external
interventions in the drawing up and adoption of new legislation, “open diaries”
for public officials, registers of lobbyists, regular reporting by lobbyists and
publication, usually on official websites, of all communications received by
public bodies in relation to a particular decision-making process. In Germany,
for example, the Ministry of Justice and Consumer Protection publishes all
statements received in the course of public consultations on draft bills. In
Switzerland, this is the case for all ministries. In Austria, all statements received
in the course of public consultation on draft bills are published on the website
of the Austrian Parliament. Not all these tools or mechanisms will necessarily
be set out in lobbying regulations, although such regulations can represent
an opportunity to recall their importance and, if necessary, clarify how they
should work.

Principle 6
33. Most regulatory systems specify standard information that should be
disclosed by the public authority or lobbyist. Member States may impose higher
levels of disclosure in cases where the subject of the public decision-making


                                                 Explanatory memorandum ► Page 23
process is deemed of particular importance. Conversely, where the subject
matter of the public decision-making process is considered to be secondary
or of little importance – measured for example by the extent of its scope
(numbers of persons concerned) or economic impact – the level of disclosure
might be lower. The same can be true for certain lobbying activities, such as
public hearings or open letters to legislators, which are transparent by def-
inition and might not require additional disclosure. Proportionate regulation
needs to be considered in particular for volunteer and not-for-profit lobbying.
34. The reference to constitutional guarantees takes into account some
political systems, for example in Germany, where constitutionally guaranteed
channels or “links” for communication between members of parliament and
their electorate, without any State interference, have been established.21 The
objective of these guarantees is to strengthen the democratic links between
parliamentarians and the people in the constituencies they represent by pro-
tecting the confidentiality of the information exchanged between them. For
the same reasons given in relation to Principle 4 (on freedom of expression), it
is important that lobbying regulations do not indirectly undermine this demo-
cratic channel of communication between voters and their representatives.


E. Public registers of lobbyists
Principle 7
35. A register of lobbyists should be maintained by public authorities. Within
the framework of a self-regulation scheme, a member State may also entrust
a designated private body with the duties and responsibilities relating to the
register of lobbyists. Principle 7 uses the plural “authorities” and “bodies” in
order to reflect the reality of different political systems. This does not imply
that they are required to maintain separate registers. In federal systems (United
States, Canada and Australia), registers exist at federal and State or provincial
level. This means that a lobbyist who is lobbying on a federal matter at the
federal level is required to register with the appropriate federal authority
and similarly with the State or provincial authority if it is a State or provincial
matter. In unitary States such as the United Kingdom, a statutory register is

   21. The German Basic Law on the Independent Mandate for MPs protects the confidentiality
       of communications between MPs and their party, associations and the “non-organised
       citizens”, particularly in their own constituency. On Germany, see Article 47 of the Basic Law,
       available at www.bundesverfassungsgericht.de/SharedDocs/Entscheidungen/EN/2013/09/
       rs20130917_2bvr243610en.html, paragraphs 91-99.



Page 24 ► Legal regulation of lobbying activities
established by the government. Devolved administrations may establish their
own lobbying registers; Scotland passed legislation in April 2016 to do so.
Some States (Ireland, for example) have chosen to require a single registra-
tion for lobbying, whether it concerns central government, local authorities
or national members of the European Parliament. What is important is to have
as few registers as possible, both in the interest of lobbyists and of the people
who wish to consult these registers.

36. Member States may decide which categories of lobbyists should register,
and may draw upon the wide diversity of models in Europe. For example, and
referring to the categories outlined in Principle 2, in the United Kingdom and
Lithuania, only certain categories of consultant lobbyists are required to reg-
ister. In Ireland, various categories of consultant lobbyists, in-house corporate
lobbyists, NGOs or civil society organisations, and voluntary organisations
are required to do so. In Germany, the register of the Bundestag is voluntary
and incentives are given to register (such as the possibility of being invited
to hearings if on the register), but only associations can register. In Poland,
anyone (including a professional lobbyist) wishing to take part in the drafting
of legislation is obliged to declare their interest in the form prescribed by law.
Professional lobbying (acting on behalf of a third person against remunera-
tion) is only allowed after making a declaratory registration. Lobbyists are
responsible for the updating their information in the register. Every public
institution is obliged to publish an annual report on professional lobbying
with regard to that institution.

Principle 8
37. In all political systems which require lobbyists to register, lobbyists them-
selves are responsible for ensuring that information in the register is accurate
and up to date, notifying the relevant registration agency of any changes that
are made to their registration. Depending on the jurisdiction (and potentially
the type of lobbyist), the frequency with which re-registration will take place
may vary. In the United States, a lobbyist must register (with the Secretary of the
Senate and the Clerk of the House) and subsequently file semi-annual reports.
In Lithuania, registration of a lobbyist (who must file an annual report on lob-
bying activities) is a one-time act, valid until the suspension or termination of
lobbying activities. The simplified, easy to use, registration process in Ireland
is an example of good practice.22 Under the Austrian Lobbying Act, lobbyists

  22. See www.lobbying.ie/umbraco/Surface/AccountSurface/Register.



                                                  Explanatory memorandum ► Page 25
are obliged to update information in the register within three weeks of any
changes to their registered data. Even though lobbyists are responsible for
registering and keeping information up to date, a public authority responsible
for the oversight of the register should also be able to verify the accuracy of
the information (see Principles 18 and 19).

Principle 9
38. Considering that the main objective of a register of lobbyists is to pro-
vide transparency regarding who is seeking to influence public officials, the
register should be easily accessible and user-friendly. The Irish system is an
example of good practice in this regard: it gives the public free online access
to a searchable database of registrations and allows users to perform detailed
searches of who is lobbying, and which officials they are lobbying.23

Principle 10
39. The processing of personal data from the register should comply with
applicable standards on personal data protection. In this regard, it is important
to note the Council of Europe Convention for the Protection of Individuals
with regard to Automatic Processing of Personal Data (ETS No. 108) and the
relevant legal instruments of the European Union.

Principle 11
40. Principle 11 refers to information which should, as a minimum, appear
systematically in the register, being provided by the lobbyist upon registration
and subsequently updated as necessary. This information could include:

Name and contact details of the lobbyist
   – name of the lobbyist
   – contact details (address, telephone, and the lobbyist’s website)
   – corporate designation
   – legal form
   – registration number
   – fields of activity (including, if appropriate, a description of the business
     or activities of the lobbyist)

   23. See www.lobbying.ie/.



Page 26 ► Legal regulation of lobbying activities
Subject matter of the lobbying activities
  – subject matter of lobbying contacts and communications (namely, details
    of the targeted areas of public policy or legislation)
  – interests represented or promoted
  – public department contacted and, if appropriate, the relevant public
    official (the position, not the person)

Identity of the client or employer, where applicable
  – identity of the client or employer represented (including, in the case of
    independent consultant lobbyists, details of the organisations for which
    they work).
41. Registers may be organised in various ways. Examples include distinguish-
ing the types of lobbyists, as seen in the European Union’s Joint Transparency
Register (which distinguishes between consultant lobbyists, in-house lobbyists
and NGOs on the register), or by the public policy area that the lobbyist seeks
to influence, as indicated by the lobbyists on registering.

Principle 12
42. Member States are encouraged to consider whether additional informa-
tion should be required when lobbyists register. For example:
  – stating the number of lobbyists employed by the firm, in the case of
    consultant lobbyists;
  – stating the name of former public officials (politicians or civil servants who
    have worked for the State) working as lobbyists for the firm, especially
    where the legal regulations include cooling-off periods or revolving-door
    measures (see Principle 17);
  – providing financial information on the volume and the value of lobbying
    contracts in the case of consultant lobbyists, or declaring lobbying costs
    in the case of in-house lobbyists.
43. Austria is an example of a State that requires financial information to be
indicated on the register of lobbyists. Lobbyists have to indicate, within nine
months of the end of each financial year, the volume of their lobbying activi-
ties and the number of lobbying cases. In the case of in-house lobbyists, the
employer has to indicate whether the costs for the lobbying activities of the
previous financial year were higher than €100 000. Organisations or bodies


                                               Explanatory memorandum ► Page 27
(see Principle 2.c) have to indicate the costs of representing their respective
professional interests.

Principle 13
44. Principle 13 is an exception and concerns only those States that have well-
established traditions of effective, open government, supported by relevant
policies and a political culture of openness in public affairs. In these States,
access to information held by public administrative bodies is regulated and
facilitated by law, and anyone may access this information. For this purpose,
there are rules concerning the keeping of official records and in most cases
the public authorities will be required to register incoming and outgoing
correspondence and documents. In these States, a register of lobbyists may
be less important in achieving the goal of transparency in relation to external
influences on public decision making. The register might still serve to provide
the public with information on the existence of particular lobbyists operating
in certain areas. However, the focus of the open government political system
will be in making public the “footprint” of a particular public decision-making
process rather than in merely identifying active lobbyists. In this context,
it is recalled that for the recommendation, the register and disclosure are
complementary principles, strengths in one compensating for weaknesses
in the other.


F. Standards of ethical behaviour for lobbyists
Principle 14
45. Principle 14 sets out four core principles of the ethical behaviour for lob-
byists (openness, transparency, honesty and integrity). These core principles
and the examples of specific behaviour (“a-d”) are typical professional values.
Specifically in relation to lobbying, these principles reflect the communica-
tion by the European Commission on 27 May 2008 entitled “A framework
for relations with interest representatives (Register and Code of Conduct)
{SEC(2008)1926},”24 and which refers to the expectation that such persons
“apply the principles of openness, transparency, honesty and integrity, as
legitimately expected of them by citizens and other stakeholders.” In relation
to conflicts of interest, Principle 14 is concerned with avoiding conflicts of

   24. See document COM(2008)323 final, available at https://ec.europa.eu/info/
       about-european-union/principles-and-values/transparency_en.



Page 28 ► Legal regulation of lobbying activities
interest between the lobbyist and the public official with whom they are in
contact or communication. This principle is also concerned with ensuring that
the lobbyist avoids conflicts with their client or employer.


G. Sanctions
Principle 15
46. In order to enhance public confidence in the democratic functioning
of government authorities, lobbying regulations must be effective. For this,
the legal regulations should contain effective, proportionate and dissuasive
sanctions, be they criminal or non-criminal. Member States will determine the
appropriate type of mechanism for dealing with non-compliance in light of
their specific national context and circumstances. Examples of non-compliance
include failing to register before making contact with public officials, or sub-
mitting false or misleading information when registering.
47. In States with lobbying regulations, the most common forms of sanc-
tion are fines, removal from the register and/or loss of privileged access, and
imprisonment. Examples of national practice are given below.

Fines
48. Professional lobbying activities that contravene the applicable lobbying
act are punishable by a fine of up to €60 000 in Austria and up to €16 000 in
Poland, depending on the seriousness of the offence. In the United States,
Officers of the US Congress inform the US Attorney’s Office (District of Columbia)
about violations of lobbying regulations occurring in either of the two legisla-
tive chambers. The Attorney’s Office may decide to prosecute and ask for a
fine of up to a maximum US$50 000 to be imposed. In addition to fines for
natural persons, in France, fines up to 1% of their turnover can be imposed
on legal persons.25

Removal from the register and/or loss of privileged access
49. In Austria, the registration authority may decide – as a sanction – to remove
a lobbyist from the public register in the case of serious non-compliance with
lobbying regulations.

  25. See French Law No. 2016-1691 of 9 December 2016 on Transparency, the Fight against
      Corruption, and Economic Modernisation.



                                                  Explanatory memorandum ► Page 29
Imprisonment
50. In Ireland, failure to comply with lobbying regulations is punishable by
a fine of up to €2 500 or a term of imprisonment of up to two years. At the
federal level in Canada, violations of lobbying regulations are punishable by
terms of imprisonment ranging from six months to two years. In the United
States, a lobbyist might be sentenced to a term of imprisonment of up to five
years for knowing and wilful failure to make a full disclosure.


H. Public sector integrity
Principle 16
51. National circumstances relevant to Principle 16 include, inter alia, the
national legal framework on preventing corruption and consolidating integrity.
This principle recalls the need to establish national standards on public sector
integrity and leaves a margin of discretion to member States on determin-
ing the appropriate measures. This might include ensuring that the relevant
codes of conduct for public officials include appropriate standards and advice
on how to respond to contact or communications from a lobbyist, as well as
putting in place mechanisms or procedures to which public officials can resort
in complex situations where the appropriate response for the public official
might not be clear or straightforward. Principle 17 provides more specific
detail in this respect. In this context, it is worth recalling that public officials
include not only civil servants but also ministers, parliamentarians or other
elected officials, and their advisors (see paragraph 19).

Principle 17
52. Principle 17 complements Principle 16 by proposing the establishment
of a cooling-off period and providing guidance to public officials.

Cooling-off period
53. This measure seeks to mitigate the possible negative impact on good
governance of former public officials moving into lobbying activities once
they have left their public employment or office. The justification of this is to
prevent former public officials using their privileged knowledge of the public
administration in which they have worked (including personal contacts and
internal procedures) as a lobbyist for the benefit of a client or employer who
wishes to influence decision making within that particular administration.


Page 30 ► Legal regulation of lobbying activities
An example may include a minister of defence leaving their job and then
immediately going to work as a lobbyist for a defence contractor that lobbies
their former ministry. In Germany, every case of potential conflict of interest
for public officials must be evaluated on an individual basis for both civil ser-
vants and former members of the federal government (chancellor, ministers,
and parliamentary state secretaries). Where a cooling-off period is applicable
for members of the federal government and parliamentary State secretaries
it is generally 12 months, but it can be extended to 18 months in exceptional
cases. The Lithuanian legislation requires former politicians to wait for one
year before becoming lobbyists and registering with the register of lobbyists.
Canada, given its federal structure, is an example of a State having varying
cooling-off periods: the federal legislation states that public office holders
have a mandatory cooling-off period of five years, whereas provinces such as
Quebec, Ontario, and Nova Scotia have cooling-off periods of two years, one
year, and six months, respectively. Restrictions on public officials taking up
employment as lobbyists before the expiry of a specified cooling-off period
may be included in more general regulations concerning the employment of
public officials once they have left public service, as is the case in Norway.26

Guidance to public officials on their relations with lobbyists

54. Public officials should be able to benefit from advice to guide them
in their relations with lobbyists. This guidance should address, but not be
limited to, how to respond to communications from lobbyists, how to report
violations of the regulations or rules of conduct on lobbying activities and
how to preserve the confidentiality of data (so that information is protected
against unintended use). Public officials should also either refuse or disclose
the receipt of gifts and hospitality offered by a lobbyist. In Germany, both the
Bundestag and the Landtage (State legislatures) have such codes of ethics for
their members, which require reporting of various gifts, travel expenses and
campaign fundraising above certain thresholds, and also prohibit the accep-
tance of benefits if they are granted in the expectation of political advantage
in return. In this regard, other States such as Ireland are developing “ethics
legislation” where politicians and civil servants have to disclose, for example,
gifts received if they are over a certain stipulated amount.27

  26. Post Public Employment Act of Norway (Act No. 70 of 19 June 2015).
  27. See Press release of 18 June 2015, “Minister Howlin announces reforms to
      Ireland’s Public Sector Standards Regime”, available at www.per.gov.ie/en/
      minister-howlin-announces-reforms-to-irelands-public-sector-standards-regime/.



                                                Explanatory memorandum ► Page 31
I. Oversight, advice and awareness
Principle 18
55. Oversight of the regulations on lobbying activities should be entrusted
to designated public authorities to ensure compliance with the regulations.
As some member States have several registers applying at different levels of
governance, there may also be several public authorities within the member
State responsible for oversight. Member States do not necessarily need to
create a new public authority entrusted with oversight and the task may be
entrusted to existing authorities.

Principle 19
56. This principle establishes possible tasks for the oversight of lobbying
regulations. Member States may of course consider additional tasks. Even
though lobbyists are responsible for providing accurate information (Principle
8), monitoring compliance means that public authorities should be able to
verify that information provided at the time of registration is correct and, if
there are unreported changes to the information initially provided, that these
should be examined. Providing guidance to lobbyists and public officials
on the application of the regulations may also be complemented by raising
awareness via media campaigns among professionals and the public regard-
ing what the regulations are about, to whom they are applicable (Principle
7), and potential penalties for non-compliance with the regulations (Principle
15). Such media campaigns may also help to better inform the public about
the ability to search the register.
57. For example, France entrusts supervision of compliance with the regula-
tions on lobbying to an existing independent authority: the High Authority for
Transparency in Public Life.28 This authority is entitled to request representatives
of interest groups to provide it with any information or document within its
field of competence without them being able to object on grounds of profes-
sional confidentiality. The High Authority may also be asked for its opinion on
the nature of a natural or legal person’s activity in order to determine whether
the activity can be categorised as lobbying. Where the High Authority finds,
on its own initiative or following a report, that there has been a breach of the
obligations laid down by the regulations on lobbying, it issues the interest

   28. See French Law No. 2016-1691 of 9 December 2016 on Transparency, the Fight against
       Corruption, and Economic Modernisation.



Page 32 ► Legal regulation of lobbying activities
group representative with a notice, which it may make public, to honour the
obligations by which they are bound, after having given them the opportunity
to make comments.

J. Review
Principle 20
58. As lobbying regulations are a comparatively new tool for most States
and as the forms of lobbying are likely to change over time, their effectiveness
should be kept under review. Member States may decide on the periodicity
and the type of review of the framework they would like to undertake and
determine which authorities or bodies should be entrusted with it.




                                              Explanatory memorandum ► Page 33
                              Sales agents for publications of the Council of Europe
                             Agents de vente des publications du Conseil de l’Europe
BELGIUM/BELGIQUE                           FINLAND/FINLANDE                           POLAND/POLOGNE
La Librairie Européenne -                  Akateeminen Kirjakauppa                    Ars Polona JSC
The European Bookshop                      PO Box 128                                 25 Obroncow Street
Rue de l’Orme, 1                           Keskuskatu 1                               PL-03-933 WARSZAWA
BE-1040 BRUXELLES                          FI-00100 HELSINKI                          Tel.: + 48 (0)22 509 86 00
Tel.: + 32 (0)2 231 04 35                  Tel.: + 358 (0)9 121 4430                  Fax: + 48 (0)22 509 86 10
Fax: + 32 (0)2 735 08 60                   Fax: + 358 (0)9 121 4242                   E-mail: arspolona@arspolona.com.pl
E-mail: info@libeurop.eu                   E-mail: akatilaus@akateeminen.com          http://www.arspolona.com.pl
http://www.libeurop.be                     http://www.akateeminen.com

                                                                                      PORTUGAL
Jean De Lannoy/DL Services                 FRANCE                                     Marka Lda
c/o Michot Warehouses                      Please contact directly /                  Rua dos Correeiros 61-3
Bergense steenweg 77                       Merci de contacter directement             PT-1100-162 LISBOA
Chaussée de Mons                           Council of Europe Publishing               Tel: 351 21 3224040
BE-1600 SINT PIETERS LEEUW                 Éditions du Conseil de l’Europe            Fax: 351 21 3224044
Fax: + 32 (0)2 706 52 27                   F-67075 STRASBOURG Cedex                   E mail: apoio.clientes@marka.pt
E-mail: jean.de.lannoy@dl-servi.com        Tel.: + 33 (0)3 88 41 25 81                www.marka.pt
http://www.jean-de-lannoy.be               Fax: + 33 (0)3 88 41 39 10
                                           E-mail: publishing@coe.int
                                           http://book.coe.int                        RUSSIAN FEDERATION/
BOSNIA AND HERZEGOVINA/                                                               FÉDÉRATION DE RUSSIE
BOSNIE-HERZÉGOVINE                                                                    Ves Mir
                                           Librairie Kléber                           17b, Butlerova.ul. - Office 338
Robert’s Plus d.o.o.
                                           1, rue des Francs-Bourgeois                RU-117342 MOSCOW
Marka Maruliça 2/V
                                           F-67000 STRASBOURG                         Tel.: + 7 495 739 0971
BA-71000 SARAJEVO
                                           Tel.: + 33 (0)3 88 15 78 88                Fax: + 7 495 739 0971
Tel.: + 387 33 640 818
                                           Fax: + 33 (0)3 88 15 78 80                 E-mail: orders@vesmirbooks.ru
Fax: + 387 33 640 818
                                           E-mail: librairie-kleber@coe.int           http://www.vesmirbooks.ru
E-mail: robertsplus@bih.net.ba
                                           http://www.librairie-kleber.com


CANADA                                                                                SWITZERLAND/SUISSE
                                           GREECE/GRÈCE                               Planetis Sàrl
Renouf Publishing Co. Ltd.                 Librairie Kauffmann s.a.                   16, chemin des Pins
22-1010 Polytek Street                     Stadiou 28                                 CH-1273 ARZIER
CDN-OTTAWA, ONT K1J 9J1                    GR-105 64 ATHINAI                          Tel.: + 41 22 366 51 77
Tel.: + 1 613 745 2665                     Tel.: + 30 210 32 55 321                   Fax: + 41 22 366 51 78
Fax: + 1 613 745 7660                      Fax.: + 30 210 32 30 320                   E-mail: info@planetis.ch
Toll-Free Tel.: (866) 767-6766             E-mail: ord@otenet.gr
E-mail: order.dept@renoufbooks.com         http://www.kauffmann.gr
http://www.renoufbooks.com
                                                                                      TAIWAN
                                           HUNGARY/HONGRIE                            Tycoon Information Inc.
CROATIA/CROATIE                            Euro Info Service                          5th Floor, No. 500, Chang-Chun Road
Robert’s Plus d.o.o.                       Pannónia u. 58.                            Taipei, Taiwan
Marasoviçeva 67                            PF. 1039                                   Tel.: 886-2-8712 8886
HR-21000 SPLIT                             HU-1136 BUDAPEST                           Fax: 886-2-8712 4747, 8712 4777
Tel.: + 385 21 315 800, 801, 802, 803      Tel.: + 36 1 329 2170                      E-mail: info@tycoon-info.com.tw
Fax: + 385 21 315 804                      Fax: + 36 1 349 2053                       orders@tycoon-info.com.tw
E-mail: robertsplus@robertsplus.hr         E-mail: euroinfo@euroinfo.hu
                                           http://www.euroinfo.hu
                                                                                      UNITED KINGDOM/ROYAUME-UNI
CZECH REPUBLIC/RÉPUBLIQUE TCHÈQUE                                                     The Stationery Office Ltd
                                           ITALY/ITALIE                               PO Box 29
Suweco CZ, s.r.o.
                                           Licosa SpA                                 GB-NORWICH NR3 1GN
Klecakova 347
                                           Via Duca di Calabria, 1/1                  Tel.: + 44 (0)870 600 5522
CZ-180 21 PRAHA 9
                                           IT-50125 FIRENZE                           Fax: + 44 (0)870 600 5533
Tel.: + 420 2 424 59 204
                                           Tel.: + 39 0556 483215                     E-mail: book.enquiries@tso.co.uk
Fax: + 420 2 848 21 646
                                           Fax: + 39 0556 41257                       http://www.tsoshop.co.uk
E-mail: import@suweco.cz
                                           E-mail: licosa@licosa.com
http://www.suweco.cz
                                           http://www.licosa.com

                                                                                      UNITED STATES and CANADA/
DENMARK/DANEMARK                           NORWAY/NORVÈGE                             ÉTATS-UNIS et CANADA
GAD                                        Akademika                                  Manhattan Publishing Co
Vimmelskaftet 32                           Postboks 84 Blindern                       670 White Plains Road
DK-1161 KØBENHAVN K                        NO-0314 OSLO                               USA-10583 SCARSDALE, NY
Tel.: + 45 77 66 60 00                     Tel.: + 47 2 218 8100                      Tel: + 1 914 472 4650
Fax: + 45 77 66 60 01                      Fax: + 47 2 218 8103                       Fax: + 1 914 472 4316
E-mail: reception@gad.dk                   E-mail: support@akademika.no               E-mail: coe@manhattanpublishing.com
http://www.gad.dk                          http://www.akademika.no                    http://www.manhattanpublishing.com

                                  Council of Europe Publishing/Éditions du Conseil de l’Europe
                                                                         Explanatory memorandum ► Page 35
                                                 F-67075 STRASBOURG Cedex
      Tel.: + 33 (0)3 88 41 25 81 – Fax: + 33 (0)3 88 41 39 10 – E-mail: publishing@coe.int – Website: http://book.coe.int
Recommendation CM/Rec(2017)2, accompanied by its
explanatory memorandum, aims to promote transparency
of lobbying in public decision making. It outlines the
principles that member States of the Council of Europe are
invited to apply in the manner most appropriate to their
specific national circumstances.
Lobbying is an important and legitimate part of the
democratic process within political systems. It concerns all
social and economic actors, public and private. Thus, public
concern over lobbying activities is growing and there is a
wish to make them transparent.
The challenges and the impact of lobbying on public
decision making are significant and it is only right that
lobbyists should follow certain rules when trying to
influence public officials and the political decision-making
process, whether they be business lobbyists or civil society
organisations. The aim of these rules is to strengthen
transparency, accountability and public confidence in
political systems. They may even serve as a basis for wider
public participation in public life and public decision
making. Without proper regulation, democratic principles
and good governance may be undermined.


                                                                PREMS 057917




                                                               ENG
   The Council of Europe is the continent’s leading
   human rights organisation. It comprises
   47 member states, 28 of which are members
   of the European Union. All Council of Europe
   member states have signed up to the European
   Convention on Human Rights, a treaty
   designed to protect human rights, democracy
   and the rule of law. The European Court of
   Human Rights oversees the implementation
   of the Convention in the member states.



   http://book.coe.int
   ISBN 978-92-871-8439-9
   €8/US$16
