Lobbying and transparency: A comparative
analysis of regulatory reform

Craig Holmana,* and William Luneburgb
a
  Government Affairs Lobbyist, Public Citizen, 215 Pennsylvania Avenue SE, Washington DC
20003, USA.
cholman@citizen.org
b
  University of Pittsburgh School of Law, 3900 Forbes Avenue, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania 15260,
USA.
wvl@pitt.edu

*Corresponding author.




Executive Summary As citizens grow increasingly wary of whose interests are
being represented in the public policy arena, especially in light of recent sensational
scandals showing a cozy relationship between professional lobbyists and law-
makers, a crisis of confidence is engulfing many democratic societies across the
European and North American continents. Public perceptions of undue influence
peddling, in which special interest groups exercise too much sway over government
for self-serving purposes, have led to growing demands for the regulation of
lobbyists and transparency of the policymaking process. The United States and
Canada have been struggling for decades to refine their systems of lobbyist
regulation. Of all the shortcomings of the North American model of lobbyist
regulation – and there are many – transparency is not, for the most part, one of
them. Many European countries have also been experimenting with systems of
lobbyist regulation. Until recently, however, the European national experiments
have produced very different results among themselves and in comparison with the
North American counterparts. Surprisingly, some of the earliest efforts to regulate
lobbying occurred among new democratic countries in Eastern Europe rather than
the more advanced industrial democracies of Western Europe. This observation
stands in stark contrast to the North American experience, where lobbyist
regulation emerged as an effort to manage a highly developed class of professional
lobbyists within the strictures of long-standing democratic principles. The authors
find that the answer to this anomaly lies in the fact that early European lobbyist
regulations focused not on transparency as a means to regain public confidence in
government, but on providing business interests with access to lawmakers as a
means to bolster fledgling economies. This focus on access is quickly giving way to
demands for transparency as many European governments, racked by scandal, are
striving to salvage the public’s trust. Propelled largely by example from a reluctant

      r 2012 Macmillan Publishers Ltd. 2047-7414 Interest Groups & Advocacy   Vol. 1, 1, 75–104
                                  www.palgrave-journals.com/iga/
      Holman and Luneburg



European Parliament and Commission, which are themselves attempting to
convince Europe that a regional government is in its own interest, several
European countries are beginning to make a transition from weak systems of
lobbyist regulation, which emphasize business access, to strong systems of lobbyist
regulation, which emphasize public transparency. In order to discern ‘best’ practices
for achieving transparency through lobbying regulation, the authors first chart the
regulatory systems of the United States and Canada. That is followed by an
analysis of all of the European lobbying regimes. The oft-expressed objection to
this new trend toward transparency in Europe – that professional lobbyists view
such regulations as overly burdensome – is undercut by research on European
and American lobbyists’ attitudes toward regulation, which are generally quite
favorable. Like everyone else, lobbyists realize that they have an image problem
and that the best way to address that problem is by operating in the broad daylight
of public transparency. Finally, the authors offer recommendations on how to
enhance transparency in policymaking, drawing from detailed comparisons of the
North American and European models of lobbyist regulation.
Interest Groups & Advocacy (2012) 1, 75–104. doi:10.1057/iga.2012.4;
published online 20 March 2012

Keywords: lobbyist; transparency; Europe; North America



The United States has struggled for more than half a century to develop an
effective system of regulating the profession of lobbying that does not overly
burden the constitutional right to petition the government. Canada has also
experimented for decades in this field. These are ongoing works-in-progress.
   It was only in the late 1980s and early 1990s that Canada and the United
States learned from mistakes made in the past and finally began to institute
effective transparency regimes. What has evolved thus far in both nations is
often seen as setting the standard for transparency with regard to influence
peddling by professional lobbyists. Of all the shortcomings of the North
American systems of lobbying regulation – and there are many – lack of
transparency is not, for the most part, one of them, at least when it comes to
the basic contours of lobbying campaigns.
   Since the more comprehensive forms of lobbying regulation began in the
United States and Canada, it is a common misperception that lobbying regulation
is a North American phenomenon. It is not.
   Some European countries have grappled with lobbying regulation for years.
Germany first implemented its lobbyist registry in 1951. Georgia adopted a
lobbyist registry in the mid-1990s, as did the European Parliament (EP). The
movement toward developing lobbyist registration systems in Europe has
increased dramatically in more recent years. Registries have been implemented
in Lithuania (2001), Poland (2005), Hungary (2006, repealed in 2011), the

76   r 2012 Macmillan Publishers Ltd. 2047-7414   Interest Groups & Advocacy   Vol. 1, 1, 75–104
                                                                    Lobbying and transparency



European Commission (2008), Macedonia (2008), France (2010), Slovenia
(2010) and Austria (2011). Several other countries are expected to adopt a regime
of lobbying regulation in the very near future, including Croatia, Ireland and the
United Kingdom. And many more countries are studying the issue, including
Bosnia, Bulgaria, the Czech Republic, Latvia, Norway, Romania, Switzerland,
Turkey and Ukraine. Indeed, the regulation and transparency of lobbying has
become one of Europe’s most catching reform drives in recent years.
   At first glance, this seems like an odd collection of nations adopting lobbyist
registration systems – crisscrossing the globe from North America to Western
Europe and into Eastern Europe and, beyond that, to the Pacific nation of
Australia, which has a highly developed lobbyist registry,1 to a few Middle
Eastern nations, like Israel, as well as a miscellany of Asian countries, like
Taiwan. For example, why would a nation such as Georgia, emerging from
communist rule and slowly developing its economy, choose to implement a
lobbyist transparency regime? And why do so many of the European lobbyist
registries rely heavily on what could aptly be described as ‘hall passes’ for
lobbyists, in which registration entitles them to special entry to the halls of
government when other forms of lobbying regulation, typified by the United
States and Canadian models, aim not at facilitating special access but, rather,
leveling the playing field among those seeking to influence the government?
   The answers lie in the underlying purpose of the lobbyist registration
systems. Lobbying regulation from the North American perspective is designed
largely to enhance transparency, reduce corruption in the policymaking
process and promote public accountability of decision makers. While the desire
for transparency is now the driving force behind most of today’s regulatory
campaigns in Europe, especially the newer models, it was not always so. Many
of the European lobbying laws were designed to facilitate the interaction
between business leaders and lawmakers in an effort to boost economic
development, not to strengthen transparency and reduce corruption. As a
result, lobbyist registration often vested corporate leaders with special rights
and privileged access to lawmakers – hence, the system of ‘hall passes’ – and
lobbyist registration records were not readily available to the public.
   Nevertheless, the purpose and concept of lobbying regulation across
Europe is rapidly undergoing a transformation – driven in no small part by
the lobbying reform movement now taking place in Brussels. Especially
among the wealthier European economies that have been racked by
government scandal and public cynicism in recent years, there is a concerted
effort by governmental authorities to win back the public’s confidence
through renewed transparency in the policymaking process. Interestingly,
across the Atlantic, scandal has often been the moving force behind reform
efforts, as occurred in the United States in the late 1980s and during the first
decade of the twenty-first century. When transparency is the ultimate goal of
     r 2012 Macmillan Publishers Ltd. 2047-7414   Interest Groups & Advocacy   Vol. 1, 1, 75–104   77
     Holman and Luneburg



lobbying regulation, much can be learned from the successes and failures of
the North American experience.
  In order to discern ‘best’ practices for achieving transparency through
lobbying regulation, the authors will first chart the regulatory systems of the
United States and Canada. That will be followed by a description of some of
the European lobbying regimes. Finally, we offer recommendations on how to
enhance transparency in policymaking, bolstered by survey data on European
lobbyists’ attitudes toward regulation.


Lobbying and Representative Government: Walking the Tightrope

From at least a contemporary perspective, lobbying is absolutely essential to
the success of representative government. Without information, perspectives
and proposals flowing from those who are governed, elected and appointed
officials can often only dimly guess at what policies will advance the interests of
those whom they are duty-bound to serve. Protection and facilitation of
lobbying is, therefore, a matter of vast significance, achieved in varying ways in
different legal systems. For example, in the United States, the right to petition
for the redress of grievances is enshrined as a right protected by the First
Amendment to the Constitution; in various European countries, lobbyists
receive passes allowing them to communicate directly with lawmakers in the
places where they gather to make decisions.
   However, along with its potential for good, lobbying can also significantly
impair the operation and undercut the perceived legitimacy of a governmental
system, producing monetary enrichment or other private benefits for public
office holders and skewing governmental decision making in ways that
undercut attempts to serve the perceived broader public interests at stake in
lawmaking and administration. Grappling with such dangers has provoked a
variety of legal responses, including, in particular, regimes seeking to insure
transparency. As famously remarked by United States Supreme Court Justice
Louis D. Brandeis (1913), ‘[p]ublicity is justly commended as a remedy for
social and industrial diseases. Sunlight is said to be the best of disinfectants;
electric light the most efficient policeman’.
   More specifically, transparency in the lobbying context can, at least
theoretically, yield a variety of benefits, including the following:
K preventing corruption of officials and the governmental processes in which
  they participate (see, for example, Warren and Cordis (2011) who offer an
  empirical study suggesting that disclosure can discourage corruption);
K preventing the appearance of corruption that might otherwise erode public

  confidence in the integrity of governmental decision making;

78   r 2012 Macmillan Publishers Ltd. 2047-7414   Interest Groups & Advocacy   Vol. 1, 1, 75–104
                                                                    Lobbying and transparency



K improving the accountability of governmental officials whose actions and
  the possible reasons for those, once revealed, may mean they are forced to
  leave office or, at a minimum, change their positions in ways deemed to be
  more consistent with the public interest as a whole (for instance, Tovar
  (2011) argues, among other things, that access and disclosure of public
  information is an important dimension of all accountabilities (vertical,
  horizontal, social and transversal));
K allowing public officials to know who is trying to influence them or others in

  authority, thereby allowing them to take action to counter influences they
  deem inappropriate or otherwise oppose; and
K ‘leveling the playing field’ among groups attempting to influence govern-

  mental decision making by permitting responses (that is, counter-lobbying)
  to counteract the efforts of those who might otherwise be able to achieve
  their aims more effectively ‘behind closed doors’.

   Transparency is not always, unfortunately, a good thing. Achieving it can
impose considerable economic costs on both the public and private sectors and
those costs can deter appropriate attempts to influence governmental decision
making. Moreover, depending upon how and where it applies, disclosure can be
equally effective in banishing the candor needed for full and frank communica-
tions in search of optimal public policy, as well as in preventing, or at least
disclosing, corrupt bargains. It can also undercut claims to confidentiality and
protection of information (for example, trade secrets) whose legitimacy may be
broadly acknowledged.
   Accordingly, reasonable people can easily disagree in their respective
judgments regarding the appropriate uses of transparency and, even when goals
are shared, how much transparency is too much. Not surprisingly, in those legal
systems where public disclosure has been adopted as the primary means to
control what are conceived to be the primary threats posed by lobbying the
government, such disagreements are common and the resulting regulatory
systems represent, in large degree, compromises between the extreme proponents
of transparency and those who see the need to limit its applicability.
   But even where there is agreement that transparency applied to lobbying is
an unmitigated good thing and the more the better, implementation issues
abound. For example, how much information is in fact usable by the public
(or highly motivated sectors thereof) in ways relevant to the purposes of the
disclosure regime? (Piotrowski and Liao, 2011, for instance, identify and
apply a set of usability criteria, including accuracy, accessibility, completeness,
understandability, timeliness and low cost). At some point, the amount of
information can mount to the point that it operates more as a burden rather
than an aid to understanding. Internet accessibility of databases eliminates the
burdens of having to physically search for relevant information; what remain,

     r 2012 Macmillan Publishers Ltd. 2047-7414   Interest Groups & Advocacy   Vol. 1, 1, 75–104   79
     Holman and Luneburg



however, are the challenges of arranging the contents of databases and
designing search engines in such a way as to maximize the ability to conduct
carefully tailored comprehensive, comparative and specially targeted searches
(for example, the political contributions of a particular lobbyist or lobbying
entity to a particular politician or political committees that expend money on
his or her behalf). Even in legal systems having intricate systems for
registration and reporting of lobbying, the data collected may be significantly
underutilized or indeed effectively unusable for the purposes for which they are
collected.


Lobbying Disclosure: The North American Experience

History and legislative goals

The current national laws governing lobbying in Canada and the United States
were enacted within several years of each other: in 1988, the Lobbyist
Registration Act (now the Lobbying Act, LA) became law in Canada, and in
1995, after more than 40 years of failed attempts to reform an unsuccessful
1946 statute, the United States Congress adopted the Lobbying Disclosure Act
of 1995 (LDA).2 Amendments to both have followed, sometimes prompted by
political scandals involving lobbyists and lawmakers. These statutes are
primarily, though not exclusively, concerned with disclosure through registra-
tion and reporting regimes that display significant similarities in approach,
though there are important distinctions.
   Both statutes are premised in part on the value of public knowledge of the
nature and scope of lobbying activities brought to bear on governmental decision
making. Official accountability and public confidence in the integrity of the
government are assumed to follow from disclosure. The LA, though not the
LDA, also emphasizes the need for public office holders to know who is seeking
to influence them, a purpose that, interestingly, had been emphasized by the
United States Supreme Court in 1954 in upholding the constitutionality of the
1946 predecessor to the LDA but does not appear among the explicit findings
supporting the current federal statute. At the same time, both statutes
acknowledge the importance of open access to government by those who may
be affected by its actions, though they do so in different ways. The LA
forthrightly acknowledges that lobbying is a legitimate activity, that free and
open access to government is important, and that the system of registration
should not impede that access. The LDA makes the same point, though less
pointedly, through its direction that it not be construed to limit the rights to
petition (and lobby), speak, and associate as protected by the First Amendment
to the United States Constitution.3
80   r 2012 Macmillan Publishers Ltd. 2047-7414   Interest Groups & Advocacy   Vol. 1, 1, 75–104
                                                                    Lobbying and transparency



Scope of registration obligation

Under both the LA and LDA, lobbying either the federal legislature or federal
administrative agencies can trigger registration. This was not always the case in
the United States; before 1995, only legislative lobbying imposed a registration
obligation. As most governmental activity today is performed outside
legislative chambers, no lobbying disclosure system can be considered truly
effective if it only applies to communications with elected representatives and
their staff. Moreover, under both the Canadian and United States’ regimes,
lobbyist activities are covered whether they are directed at policymaking or
implementation, at regulation or distribution of monetary benefits.
   At the same time, the level of the public official contacted by the lobbyist
may be crucial in terms of registration and reporting obligations. In Canada,
communications with any employee of ‘Her Majesty in right of Canada’ can
attract a registration obligation, though meetings with certain ‘designated
public office holders’ (officials holding positions of high rank in the
government) impose an added reporting burden. In the United States, only
communications with ‘covered officials’ trigger registration and some reporting
obligations; those officials basically include all persons in the legislative
branch, but is limited to officials holding policymaking or other significant
authority in the administrative bureaucracy.
   In designing a registration system, the issue immediately arises with regard to
what types of activity should be covered. As it turns out, both the Canadian and
United States laws exempt activities that are already, as a general matter,
conducted in public view (for example, legislative hearings) or involve
administrative proceedings that focus on individual cases where there are already
elaborate procedural constraints to control official discretion and the influences
brought to bear thereon. On the other hand, Canadian law covers both direct and
grassroots lobbying (efforts to encourage public pressures on officials to take
particular action). Owing to strong opposition based both on constitutional
concerns and political calculation, under the LDA grassroots lobbying triggers
neither registration nor any reporting obligation (with very limited exceptions).
   Registration can, of course, impose significant burdens, as both Canadian
and United States law acknowledge by creating various other exemptions in
recognition of the need to protect the right to petition and open access to
government. Accordingly, persons who lobby on their own behalf do not have
to register nor do persons who volunteer their services (a circumstance that
generally occurs when the client cannot afford representation).
   Beyond these exemptions, other thresholds for registration are imposed,
though there are significant differences between the LA and LDA in that
regard. Under both the LA and LDA, registrants are basically divided into two
groups: persons that lobby on behalf of other persons or entities (in Canada,
     r 2012 Macmillan Publishers Ltd. 2047-7414   Interest Groups & Advocacy   Vol. 1, 1, 75–104   81
      Holman and Luneburg



known as ‘consultant’ lobbyists; in the United States, ‘lobbying firms’) and
entities (corporations and organizations) that lobby on their own behalf. In the
United States, monetary thresholds apply in both cases: a lobbying firm need
not register for a client if its income for lobbying on behalf of that client
amounts to US$3000 or less during a 3-month period; organizations lobbying
on their own behalf must expend more than $11 500 during a 3-month period
in order to incur a registration obligation. In all events, at least one employee
of the firm or other entity must expend 20 per cent or more of their efforts over
a 3-month period providing lobbying services for the client and, in addition,
make certain non-exempt communications with covered officials over their
course of representation of the client. (The 20 per cent test has come in for
considerable criticism in the last few years as a device allowing manipulated
avoidance of registration and disclosure obligations.)
   On the other hand, for consultant lobbyists in Canada, any agreement to
represent another for pay in communicating with a public office holder with
regard to covered governmental decisions or arranging a meeting with a public
office holder triggers registration. When it comes to organizations and
corporations that lobby on their own behalf, however, the lobbying efforts
(including preparation for communications with public office holders) of one
its employees or the efforts of all considered together must amount to a
‘significant part’ of the work performed for the employer (indeed a 20 per cent
rule is applied as a baseline, though differently from the United States).


Content of registration

When it comes to the content of the registration, the basic information required
is largely the same under both US and Canadian law, though there are some
differences. Under each regime, the registrant must: (i) identify himself/herself/
itself and their address, the client for whom they work, individual lobbyists
employed by the registrant and various affiliated entities; (ii) list former public
offices held by lobbyists identified on the registration; and (iii) specify the areas
where lobbying has occurred or is expected. In the latter regard, both the LA
and the LDA require the registrant to list the general subject matter areas for
lobbying activity, as well as specific issues (for example, bills) (to be) addressed;
the LA, however, goes further and requires identification of the government
entity (to be) contacted and the communication techniques (to be) employed
(for example, grassroots communications). Moreover, the LA, but not the
LDA, requires a certification that the lobbying undertaking does not provide
for payment that is contingent on the success or failure of the lobbying effort.
(Such a contingency lobbying arrangement is unlawful in Canada; some, but
not all, violate federal law in the United States.)
82   r 2012 Macmillan Publishers Ltd. 2047-7414   Interest Groups & Advocacy   Vol. 1, 1, 75–104
                                                                    Lobbying and transparency



   Disclosure of the individual members of lobbying organizations, associations
and coalitions inevitably raises concerns regarding impairment of the freedom
of association. Under the LA, lobbying organizations must describe their
membership (though not including individual persons who are members) and
provide other information to identify membership as may be prescribed by
regulation. Under the LDA, membership of the client coalition or association
is not an element of required disclosure except where the coalition or association
member contributes more than $5000 to the lobbying activities of the coalition or
association in a 3-month period and, in addition, ‘actively’ participates in the
planning, supervision and control of those lobbying activities.


Content of periodic reports

The Canadian and United States’ regimes differ significantly in terms of the
reporting obligations of registrants. In neither case, however, is there any
requirement to disclose a detailed description of communications made to
public office holders, though it can be forcefully argued that such disclosure is
the only effective way to discourage improper behavior by lobbyists (and
officials) and to fully inform the public of the nature of lobbying efforts. Of
course, such disclosure, if required, could impose significant cost burdens on
registrants, deter appropriate lobbying efforts and/or discourage public
officials from speaking to some groups.
   Under the LA, monthly reports by consultant lobbyists, and lobbying
corporations and organizations must identify oral (but not written) commu-
nications (whether face-to-face, over the telephone or in videoconferences)
regarding registerable subject matters that have been ‘pre-arranged’ with
‘designated public office holders’. These reports must include the names of the
office holders involved, their titles and the names of the governmental entities
employing them or where they serve, and the subject matter(s) discussed; the
names of the lobbyists involved are disclosed if the reports are filed by
consultant lobbyists, but not if filed by entities that lobby on their own behalf.
If the subject matter of the report was not covered by the registration form, the
registration must be amended to reflect it. Written communications are
purportedly not covered because they (or at least some of them) may be
accessed through the government’s freedom of information regime.
   Under the LDA, reporting is quarterly and must include income earned by
lobbying firms for lobbying activities on behalf of the client and expenses
incurred by an organization that lobbies on its own behalf for its lobbying
activities (including fees paid to lobbying firms and other third parties). For
each general issue area in which the registrant engaged in lobbying activities
during the quarter, the report must list the lobbyists active in that area, the

     r 2012 Macmillan Publishers Ltd. 2047-7414   Interest Groups & Advocacy   Vol. 1, 1, 75–104   83
      Holman and Luneburg



specific issues (for example, a named bill) for which there was lobbying activity,
which House of Congress or federal agency was contacted by a lobbyist, and
any affiliated foreign entity interested in the issues lobbied. The usefulness of
this information is significantly impaired, however, by the failure to require
that lobbyists be specifically identified with the particular issues they lobbied
and the specific governmental entity or person they contacted. The same type
of problem is found in the Canadian system in the case of corporations and
organizations where this type of information is contained on the registration
form as amended periodically, though the monthly reports supply a more
focused picture of lobbying efforts. In the case of consultant lobbyists, such
reports specifically link specific lobbyists with the issues and officials lobbied
on a particular date.
   Since 2007, under the LDA, registrants and the lobbyists listed in registration
statements and quarterly reports must also file semiannual reports of their political
contributions to candidates and political committees, and their contributions and
disbursements to entities controlled by or for events held in the name of or to
honor covered executive and legislative branch officials. Such reports must contain
a certification that such contributions and disbursements did not result in a
violation of the gift and travel rules applicable to Members of Congress and their
staffs; this certification requirement is matched by a legal prohibition enforceable
against the filer for violations of those rules.


Administration and enforcement

In Canada, administration and enforcement authority for the LA is vested in an
‘independent’ officer of Parliament, the Commissioner of Lobbying. Similarly, in
the United States, administration of the LDA is vested in two legislative officers,
the Secretary of the Senate and the Clerk of the House of Representatives. In a
parliamentary system like Canada’s, there is no apparent incongruity in allowing
a legislative official to oversee lobbying, whether that lobbying is directed at the
legislature or the administrative bureaucracy. In the United States, however, with
its constitutionally mandated separation of powers, a lobbying registration
system run by officials appointed by the legislative branch covering efforts aimed
at executive branch officials is anomalous at best, and comes close to the line
separating permissible from impermissible comingling of functions. For much the
same reason, the ‘enforcement’ authority vested in the Secretary and Clerk is
minimal to avoid constitutional challenge.
   The Commissioner of Lobbying, like the Secretary and Clerk, has the
authority to issue non-binding interpretations and guidance documents to
assist registrants (and prospective registrants) in determining their registration
and reporting responsibilities. Each of these officials is responsible for receiving

84   r 2012 Macmillan Publishers Ltd. 2047-7414   Interest Groups & Advocacy   Vol. 1, 1, 75–104
                                                                    Lobbying and transparency



the filings required under the applicable law; in both countries, electronic filing
is basically mandatory.
    The Secretary’s and Clerk’s power to investigate potential non-compliance
with the LDA is modestly provided, merely ‘to review, and, where necessary,
verify and inquire to ensure the accuracy, completeness and timeliness of
registration and reports’. The LDA is explicit in its refusal to grant these
officials ‘general audit or investigative authority’. In contrast, the Canadian
Commissioner of Lobbying has the same powers as a court to compel persons
to give oral or written evidence under oath, and to produce documents and
other things of relevance to his or her investigation.
    If apparent violations of the LDA are discovered, the Secretary’s and Clerk’s
enforcement authority amounts to nothing more than issuing notices to
persons (including registrants) that they may be in non-compliance with the
law and then notifying the United States Attorney for the District of Columbia
of potential violations. The United States Attorney has the sole power to seek
court sanctions for violations. The Commissioner of Lobbying can, however,
not only notify the Royal Canadian Mounted Police of suspected violations for
possible prosecution, but also advise Parliament of violations discovered
during his or her investigations, with any resulting adverse publicity serving as
at least a partial sanction and deterrent to others. Legal sanctions for violat-
ions of the LA and LDA (including the provision of false or misleading
information) are fines and, in appropriate cases, imprisonment. In Canada, but
not the United States, violations can result in prohibiting the lobbyist from
engaging in registerable communications with public office holders for up to 2
years. A similar sanction was available under the 1946 federal lobbying law in
the United States, but constitutional concerns warned Congress away from
maintaining that type of sanction when it adopted the LDA in 1995.
    It should be noted that, in terms of official sanctions imposed on violators of
both the LDA and LA, there have been few to date. That situation has
prompted reform proposals of various types, including (in the United States)
transferal of administrative authority away from a legislative branch official
and (in Canada) vesting the Commissioner of Lobbying with formal power to
impose administrative sanctions.
    Finally, the advent of the Internet has meant that the shared statutory goal of
the Canadian and United States registration regimes in terms of public information
is more realistically achievable now than ever before. The Commissioner,
Secretary and Clerk each maintain for public use Internet-accessible and
searchable databases of information provided on registrations and periodic
reports. In light of electronic filing of required documents, the time lag between
filing and posting on the Internet can be minimized and searchability can be
maximized (assuming appropriate hardware and software is utilized by the
government to power the search engines).
     r 2012 Macmillan Publishers Ltd. 2047-7414   Interest Groups & Advocacy   Vol. 1, 1, 75–104   85
     Holman and Luneburg



A lobbyist code of conduct

One of the principal distinctions between Canadian and the United States
national laws on lobbying is the existence in Canada of a lobbyist code of
conduct that has legal effect, though the sanction for violations consists
entirely of adverse publicity and the practical consequences resulting there-
from. This code, developed by the Commissioner of Lobbying, came into effect
in 1997. It consists of various principles (integrity, honesty, openness and
professionalism) and rules, with guidance provided by the Commissioner who
has the authority to investigate potential violations and to issue public reports
where transgressions of the code have been identified. Recently, the code has
been construed to prohibit certain political activities undertaken by lobbyists
that have been viewed as placing in a conflict of interest public office holders
who receive the benefits of the lobbyists’ efforts.
   Although the United States has no code of conduct for lobbyists, the 2007
amendments to the LDA – which came in response to the Jack Abramoff
lobbying scandal (see Washington Post, 2005) – makes lobbyists and lobbying
organizations potentially liable for facilitating or encouraging violations of the
congressional ethics rules by Members of Congress. Lobbyists are required to
certify in writing on a special semiannual report that they have read the rules of
the Senate and House of Representatives relating to restrictions on gifts and
travel, and certify that they have not knowingly caused a violation of these
rules. Furthermore, any organization sponsoring travel for a member or staff
of Congress must also sign an oath that financing of the travel conforms to
congressional ethics rules. In the first case of its kind, the head of one such
organization, the NEW YORK CARIB NEWS, pleaded guilty in court to
violating that oath when he falsely claimed that no corporations or lobbying
associations were helping pay for a trip he sponsored to the Caribbean for
Members of Congress (Barrett, 2011).
   The following Table 1 contains a general comparison of United States and
Canadian disclosure regimes for lobbying activities.


Weak Regulatory Regimes in Europe

Reviewing lobbyist regulatory regimes in Europe, it is evident that some of
these systems value transparency only secondarily, if at all. Germany, Georgia,
Lithuania and Poland maintain lobbyist registration systems in which few
lobbyists bother to register. The systems are either voluntary or capture only a
small part of the lobbying community. The information required of registered
lobbyists tends to be limited in scope, usually avoiding any disclosures of
financial activity, and is not easily accessible to the public.
86   r 2012 Macmillan Publishers Ltd. 2047-7414   Interest Groups & Advocacy   Vol. 1, 1, 75–104
r 2012 Macmillan Publishers Ltd. 2047-7414
                                             Table 1: The basic features of the lobbying regimes of the United States and Canada

                                             Elements of lobbying regime                                                                                                United States   Canada
                                                                                                                  a
                                             Specifies the type of activity that attracts a registration obligation in terms of:
                                               a. Oral and written communications (subject to certain exceptions for various public and/or closely regulated                Yes          Yes
                                                    proceedings and in the case of persons lobbying on their own behalf or as volunteers)
                                               b. Directed to both administrative and legislative branch officials                                                          Yes          Yes
                                               c. As long as the communications deal with governmental policymaking or its implementation                                   Yes          Yes
                                               d. Though the level of official in the governmental hierarchy contacted may be relevant to determining                       Yes          No
                                                    coverage

                                             Entities that must register are divided into two classes: persons or entities that lobby on their own behalf and those         Yes          Yes
                                             that lobby for third parties, where registration turns in part on




Interest Groups & Advocacy
                                               a. The amount of time spent on lobbying                                                                                      Yes          Yes
                                               b. The fees earned from or funds expended for lobbying activities                                                            Yes          No

                                             Registration form requires the disclosure of basic information about the registrant (for example, name, address, client)       Yes          Yes
                                             and the expected areas/issues of to be lobbied plus
                                               a. The techniques of lobbying to be used (for example, grass-roots)                                                          No           Yes




                                                                                                                                                                                                 Lobbying and transparency
                                               b. Governmental positions formerly held by lobbyists covered by the registration                                             Yes          Yes
                                               c. Names of lobbying coalition members                                                                                       Yesb         Yes
                                               d. Monetary contributions to the lobbying efforts from third parties (for example, where the registrant is a                 Yes          No




Vol. 1, 1, 75–104
                                                    lobbying coalition)
                                               e. The names of the lobbyist employees of the registrant                                                                     Yes          Yes

                                             Periodic reports required of lobbying and related activity covering                                                            Yes          Yes
                                               a. The general and specific subject matter(s) of lobbying activities                                                         Yes          Yes
                                               b. The names of active lobbyists                                                                                             Yes          Yes
                                               c. Amount of money paid for or spent on lobbying activities                                                                  Yes          No
87
88
                                             Table 1 continued




r 2012 Macmillan Publishers Ltd. 2047-7414
                                                                                                                                                                                       Holman and Luneburg
                                             Elements of lobbying regime                                                                                      United States   Canada

                                                 d. The names of the specific officials contacted as part of the lobbying efforts and the subject matter(s)       No           Yes
                                                    discussed
                                                 e. The specific content of communications with contacted officials or entities or a summary thereof              No           No
                                                 f. Political contributions and other disbursements to or for the benefit of covered officials                    Yes          No

                                             Administration of disclosure regime by
                                               a. An official affiliated with the legislative branch of government                                                Yes          Yes
                                               b. Who may issue guidance documents clarifying the requirements of the disclosure regime for those who may         Yes          Yes
                                                  be subject to it
                                               c. With powers of investigation of potential violations                                                            Yes          Yes
                                               d. Powers to sanction violators themselves                                                                         No           No
                                               e. Relying on other governmental officials to prosecute violations                                                 Yes          Yes
                                               f. With possible sanctions to include fines and imprisonment                                                       Yes          Yes




Interest Groups & Advocacy
                                             Internet-accessible and searchable databases of information provided on registrations and periodic reports           Yes          Yes
                                               (maintained by the administrator of the lobbying regime)

                                             A lobbyist code of conduct                                                                                           No           Yes
                                             a
                                             The LA, unlike the LDA, does not define or use the term ‘lobbyist’ for coverage purposes.
                                             b
                                             This disclosure applies where the contribution to lobbying activities exceeds $5000 in a quarterly period.




Vol. 1, 1, 75–104
                                                                    Lobbying and transparency



   In Germany, the registry is voluntary and is not designed as a lobbyist
registry per se. Instead, it is primarily a registration system for issuing passes to
enter the parliamentary buildings. The registry is only of organizations rather
than individuals; it does not include any financial information, disclose who is
participating in lobbying on behalf of an entity or specify on what issues the
organization lobbies. Germany’s lobbying law was originally envisioned as a
means to institutionalize the involvement of powerful trade associations and
labor unions in governmental policymaking.
   Georgia has had a lobbyist registration system since 1998. The law itself
reads like a comprehensive registry. Registered lobbyists, for example, must
disclose their names, occupational titles, work residences, compensation and
expenditures for lobbying activity, as well as issues lobbied. However, very
few people have ever bothered to register as lobbyists. In fact, the authors
are unable to pinpoint a specific number of registrants. Indirect evidence
suggests that the number may well be less than a dozen. That assessment was
made by at least one observer monitoring transparency in Georgia, who then
filed a freedom of information request with the government for a definitive
response; no response to that inquiry has been received as of this writing.4
One commercial lobbying firm – Policy and Management Consulting Group
(2010) – even went so far as to tout its progressive credentials by noting in
a brochure that, while almost no one registers in Georgia, it had indeed
done so.
   Lithuania is not much more impressive when it comes to transparency of
lobbying activities. It began a registry in 2001. Lithuania’s registration system
only includes contract lobbyists who attempt to influence the legislative branch
of government, specifically excluding both in-house lobbyists, who are
considered part of a corporation’s permanent staff, and non-profit lobbying
organizations. Lobbyists in Lithuania submit an annual report of their
lobbying activities to the registry. In addition to name, address, phone
number and certificate number, a registered lobbyist must also record his or
her income from and expenditures for lobbying activities, and the title(s) of
legislation influenced by the lobbyist. The reports are published in the
Official Gazette of Lithuania. In 2007, there were 13 registered lobbyists in
Lithuania, of whom 11 were active (Piasecka, 2007).
   Hungary set up a voluntary lobbyist registry in 2006. Like many of the
other programs in effect in Europe, the registry entitled registrants to a
lobbying license for easy access in the halls of government. It also required
registrants to file quarterly reports on their lobbying activities, including
the number of lobbying contacts, any gifts given to public officials and the
identities of those officials, as well as the legislation or executive policies
lobbied. It did not, however, require registrants to identify their clients. The
lobbyist reports were made available to the public on the Web page of
     r 2012 Macmillan Publishers Ltd. 2047-7414   Interest Groups & Advocacy   Vol. 1, 1, 75–104   89
     Holman and Luneburg



the Central Office of Justice. Hungarian authorities made some effort to
encourage registration; this was reflected in the fact that in March 2010
there were 248 individual lobbyists and 44 lobbying organizations
registered.
   Nevertheless, the recently elected FIDESZ government quietly repealed
Hungary’s lobbyist registration system in 2011. The voluntary Hungarian
Lobby Law was perceived neither as an effective method of facilitating a
partnership between business and government nor as a means of enhancing
public confidence in government (Kanins, 2011).
   Poland implemented what is described as a mandatory lobbyist registry
in 2005. Similar to Lithuania, however, it applies only to contract lobbyists.
The registry is public information, accessible through the Public Informa-
tion Bulletin of the Minister of Interior and Administration. Disclosure
records include the identities of lobbyists, as well as their employers and
issues lobbied. One unique feature of the Polish system is that govern-
ment officials are required to maintain records of lobbying contacts,
which are then published annually. In the first year of operation, 75 entities
registered.
   Although it is still too early to assess the impact of the new lobbying
registration system in France, the lobby law bears many of the same weak
regulatory characteristics of the regimes of the European nations discussed
above. The lobbyist registry is voluntary for both the National Assembly and
the Senate. Registration entitles the lobbyist to a pass system that grants easy
access to the Palais Bourbon (National Assembly) and the Palais du
Luxembourg (Senate). Registered lobbyists in France do not disclose their
financial activity, though clients are identified. This limited information,
however, is not made readily available to the public on the Internet.
   The situation in Macedonia is almost inexplicable. Even though Macedonia
adopted a lobbyist registration law in 2008, also based on the hall pass system,
the government has yet to implement the law. There appears to be considerable
confusion and disdain over what constitutes lobbying – prompting not a single
registration to date – and apparently no sense of urgency among governmental
officials to clarify and implement the law in any meaningful fashion (European
Commission, 2011).
   For the most part, these regulatory regimes focus more on providing
business interests with access to lawmakers than on reducing the potential
for corruption. Lobbyist registration tends to be a matter of convenience,
which means that it is widely ignored when the lobbyists and business
interests believe that they have sufficient access without registration. Most
of the disclosure reports contain inadequate information and, with few
exceptions among the weaker regulatory regimes, public access to the
reports is limited to hard-to-find print records.
90   r 2012 Macmillan Publishers Ltd. 2047-7414   Interest Groups & Advocacy   Vol. 1, 1, 75–104
                                                                    Lobbying and transparency



Europe’s New Wave of Strong Lobbying Regulation

At present, the scope and nature of the regulation of lobbying across much of
Europe is rapidly changing. Brussels is perhaps the single greatest, yet clearly
reluctant, driving force behind transforming the focus of lobbying regulation
from facilitating influence peddling to strengthening the transparency of the
legislative process.
   At the very time in 2005 when the European Union (EU) sought to expand
and strengthen its role in transnational European governance, public trust in
the institutions of the EU was reaching a low point. Among all EU citizens,
those expressing distrust in the EU (43 per cent) nearly matched those who
expressed trust (44 per cent). An overwhelming 59 per cent of those surveyed
said that they ‘tend to disagree’ that their voice counts in the affairs of the EU.
Even more alarming, only 24 per cent of respondents said they knew ‘quite a
lot’ or ‘a great deal’ about the EU and its institutions, whereas 76 per cent said
they knew ‘a bit’ or ‘nothing at all’ (European Commission, 2006).
   The low level of citizen trust in the EU and the general absence of public
knowledge about its institutions in 2005 bode poorly for the campaign to
strengthen its role in European policymaking. The campaign to more firmly
establish the EU’s role suffered another major setback when both France
and the Netherlands rejected the proposed new constitution for the EU that
year.
   Thus began another effort, this time from inside the European Commission
(EC): the European Transparency Initiative (ETI), designed primarily to
enhance transparency in EU policymaking and boost public knowledge and
confidence in the decision-making processes in Brussels. Commissioner Siim
Kallas from Estonia championed the transparency campaign. Suddenly, a new
style of lobbyist regulation was thrust front and center on the European stage.
   The EP had in place a lobbyist registration system ever since 1996, but the
Parliament’s registry was largely modeled on the weaker regulatory regimes of
some European countries. It provided registrants with annual passes for entry
into the Parliament. Although names of registered lobbyists were made
available to the public on the EP Website, other relevant information (such as
the nature of the lobbying work, the interests for which lobbyists were acting
and any legislation lobbied) was not disclosed. The lobbyist registry for the EP
at that time was primarily for the benefit of lobbyists and lawmakers, not
primarily for the purpose of public transparency.
   Kallas originally envisioned a very different system of lobbyist regulation for
the EC, primarily geared toward transparency. ETI was initially proposed as a
mandatory registration system. The identities of lobbyists, their clients,
financial activities and issues lobbied all would be instantly available to the
public through a Web-based registry (EurActiv, 2005).
     r 2012 Macmillan Publishers Ltd. 2047-7414   Interest Groups & Advocacy   Vol. 1, 1, 75–104   91
     Holman and Luneburg



   However, the final result of the ETI has turned out to be less ambitious.
After years of negotiations between lobbyists, Kallas and members of the EC,
the eventual product, which was launched in June 2008 and is still largely in
place today, has created a voluntary registry for ‘interest representatives’.
Organizations and individuals register as ‘interest representatives’ (thereby
avoiding the presumed derogatory label of ‘lobbyist’) and disclose a moderate
amount of information, specifically whom they represent, what their missions
are and their ‘turnover’ of overall funding for lobbying purposes. Turnover is
the total revenue from all clients for lobbying. Registrants also disclose a rank
order of clients in decreasing order of contract value, based on ranges in value
of every h50 000 or 10 per cent of total revenues. The names of individual
lobbyists are not disclosed.
   While ETI provides for a voluntary approach, it encourages participation in
its registry through a different incentive than entry passes. ETI rewards
registrants with ‘automatic alerts’ of pending official actions on legislation and
matters of concern to the registered interest representatives. Although this
unique form of incentive to register was rolled out with considerable fanfare, it
has little practical impact. After all, it is the job of lobbyists to be on top of
what is happening in the legislature, preferably even prompting legislative
activity. That is why only about 15 per cent of EU lobbyists in Brussels
indicated in a survey that the system of automatic alerts is a significant
incentive for registration (Holman, 2009). As of June 2010, only 1068
organizations with a Brussels office are registered. This figure compares to
the EP’s estimate of 2600 lobby groups with offices in Brussels in 2000, and
suggests that well under half of Brussels-based lobby organizations and firms
have signed up after 2 years. Key sectors, such as lobbying consultancies and
corporate EU affairs offices, are underrepresented. Out of a group of 328
consultancies identified as providing EU lobbying services, 163 are listed on the
Commission’s register (50 per cent). Another report by Friends of the Earth
Europe showed that 20 of the 50 largest EU companies (40 per cent) are not
registered (ALTER-EU, 2010).
   Nevertheless, the ETI campaign fundamentally transformed the objective of
lobbyist registration systems to focus on transparency and bolstering public
confidence in the EU. ETI at the very least has produced a state-of-the-art
electronic filing and disclosure system for those who do register.
   The debate in Brussels regarding the appropriate form of lobbyist regulation
rages to this day (see Dinan, 2011 for an overview and analysis of the ETI). The
small number of participants in the registry, as well as the limited information
on lobbying activity offered by the registry, has forced the EC periodically to
reevaluate and redesign the program.
   This reevaluation of the lobbying transparency program came to a head
most recently with a new lobbying scandal, known as the ‘cash-for-amendments’
92   r 2012 Macmillan Publishers Ltd. 2047-7414   Interest Groups & Advocacy   Vol. 1, 1, 75–104
                                                                    Lobbying and transparency



scandal. Testing the accuracy of hearsay that members of the EP may be
easily bought, journalists for the Sunday Times posed as lobbyists and
offered bribes to Member of the European Parliaments (MEPs) in exchange
for official favors. At least four MEPs complied, while being secretly
videotaped.
   Austrian euro-deputy Ernst Strasser, Slovenian Socialist Zoran Thaler,
Romanian Socialist MEP Adrian Severin and Spanish euro-deputy Pablo
Zalba were all recorded taking money and delivering on the official actions
requested by the undercover journalists. Zalba claimed to be a victim of a ‘trap’
in which the journalists requested two amendments to draft legislation on
consumer protection. Zalba asserted that he agreed to table the second
amendment as he believed it would help protect small investors, but the Sunday
Times team claim that they made it clear to the euro-deputy that he would be
paid for his services (Willis, 2011).
   The scandal produced a wave of demands for lobbying reform in Brussels.
EP President Jerzy Buzek swiftly acquiesced and promised sweeping new
reforms with regard to the regulation of lobbying in Brussels, including a
mandatory registry sometime in the near future and a strict code of ethics
(ALTER-EU, 2011). Buzek set up a working group of 10 MEPs of the EP that
proposed a series of new ethics rules for Parliament.
   More immediately, the EC and Parliament have set up a common Web page
for the two lobbyist databases, called the ‘transparency registry’.5 Although
this new EU registry remains a voluntary system, it has somewhat enhanced
the quality of the lobbyist disclosure system by combining the two databases
and generating further discussion within the EU for the eventual creation of a
mandatory system of lobbyist registration and disclosure.
   Across Europe, many nations are similarly moving toward a strong model of
lobbyist regulation. The most recently enacted lobbyist registrations systems in
Slovenia and Austria are both sweeping in scope and clearly geared more
toward enhancing transparency and reducing corruption in government than
for the purpose of facilitating business access to government officials.
However, the true test will be in their implementation.
   Slovenia’s ‘Integrity and Prevention of Corruption Act (ZIntPK)’ is an
ambitious program boldly stating in the preamble that it is ‘aimed at strengthening
integrity and transparency, as well as preventing corruption and avoiding and
combating conflicts of interest’. The law creates a special Commission for the
Prevention of Corruption charged with implementing and enforcing the law. It
applies to the legislative and executive branches of the national government, as
well as local governmental bodies. Registration is mandatory for all individuals
working in a private capacity to influence legislation or public policy and requires
information on the names and addresses of lobbyists, their clients or businesses
represented, compensation received, as well as any campaign contributions made
     r 2012 Macmillan Publishers Ltd. 2047-7414   Interest Groups & Advocacy   Vol. 1, 1, 75–104   93
      Holman and Luneburg



to political parties, specific issues lobbied and the offices contacted. Data in the
registry is public information.
   Perhaps the most unique aspect of the lobbying law in Slovenia is its emphasis
on requiring government officials to report lobbying contacts, which are then
posted on the Commission’s Web page. During the first year of implementation of
the law, the Commission has provided the number of lobbying contacts made with
each government office and ministry on the Internet, but has also publicly
expressed some frustration that government officials may not be reporting all their
lobbying contacts. In an effort to encourage compliance, the Commission reports
‘0’ contacts by each office that has not reported any contacts.6 Slovenia’s
approach to lobbying regulation will be an interesting and informative experiment.
   Austria has also adopted a strong form of lobbying regulation, known as the
‘Lobbying and Advocacy Transparency Act – LobbyG’, though the law is not
scheduled for implementation until 2012. The ‘cash-for-amendments’ scandal
that has prompted substantive lobbying and ethics reforms in Brussels, also
directly and personally embarrassed Austria. Ernst Strasser, former Austrian
Secretary of Interior and an Austrian MEP, was one of the MEPs caught on
video accepting a bribe in exchange for introducing legislation in the EP. He
resigned within hours of the video being published. More importantly, the
scandal also prompted Austria to impose tough new regulations on its own
domestic lobbyists.
   The Austrian National Council approved legislation to impose a mandatory
lobbyist registry. All professional lobbyists who receive significant compensa-
tion to influence legislation and administrative policies, as well as special
interest groups employing lobbyists are required to file with the lobbying
Register (Register of Interest Representation (IRV)). Disclosure reports must
include information on the identities of the lobbyists, clients, issues lobbied, the
value of lobbying contracts and initial lobbying contacts with government
officials. Most of the IRV data is to be published on the Internet for easy access
by the public. Registrants must also pledge to abide by a Code of Conduct
established as part of the lobbying law, violations of which may result in a
suspension of lobbying activities and lobbying contracts.
   Table 2 summarizes the key statutory provisions of the weak and strong
lobbying laws across the European continent. This summary, however, must be
viewed in proper perspective. Unlike the summary of lobbying laws in Canada
and the United States provided above, the foregoing analysis of Europe’s
lobbying regimes shows that some laws, such as Macedonia’s, are not being
implemented by the government whereas others, such as in Georgia, are
generally not being enforced. Some of Europe’s newest lobbying laws, such as
in Austria, are pending but not yet legally effective. In other words, Table 2
provides a description of the statutory provisions of each nation’s lobbying
laws as they exist ‘on the books’, if not in reality.
94   r 2012 Macmillan Publishers Ltd. 2047-7414   Interest Groups & Advocacy   Vol. 1, 1, 75–104
                                             Table 2: Statutory provisions of lobbying laws in Europe (2011)




r 2012 Macmillan Publishers Ltd. 2047-7414
                                             Type of lobbyist regulation                                            Weak lobbyist systems                           Strong lobbyist systems

                                                                                                 France   Georgia   Germany   Lithuania   Macedonia   Poland   EP     EC    Austria   Slovenia

                                             Mandatory or voluntary registration                   V        V         V          M           V         M       V      V       M          M
                                             Access pass to lawmakers                              X        X         X          X           X         X       X      —       —          —

                                             Lobbyist registrants:
                                               a. Non-profit entities                              X        —         X          —           —         —       X       X       X         —
                                               b. For-profit entities                              X        —         X          —           —         —       X       X       X         —
                                               c. Contract lobbyists                               X        X         —          X           X         X       X       X       X         X

                                             Covered officials:
                                               a. Legislative                                     X         X         X          X           X          X      X      X        X         X
                                               b. Executive                                       —         X         —          —           X          X      —      —        X         X




Interest Groups & Advocacy
                                             Registrants disclose:
                                               a. Lobbyist name                                   X         X         —          X           X         X       X      —       X          X
                                               b. Lobbyist employer                               X         X         X          X           X         X       X      X       X          X
                                               c. Lobbyist client                                 X         —         —          X           X         X       X      X       X          X
                                               d. General issue lobbied                           —         X         —          —           —         —       X      X       X          —




                                                                                                                                                                                                 Lobbying and transparency
                                               e. Specific measure lobbied                        X         X         —          X           X         X       —      —       X          X
                                               f. Aggregate lobbying income                       —         —         —          X           —         —       X      X       X          X
                                               g. Lobbying income per client                      —         X         —          X           X         —       X      X       X          X
                                               h. Aggregate lobbying spending                     —         —         —          X           —         —       —      —       X          —



Vol. 1, 1, 75–104
                                               i. Lobbying spending per issue                     —         —         —          —           —         —       —      —       —          —
                                               j. Lobbying contacts                               —         —         —          —           X         X       —      —       X          X
                                               k. Political spending/contributions                —         —         —          —           —         —       —      —       —          X
                                             Fines/imprisonment for violations                    —         —         —          X           —         X       —      —       X          X
                                             Internet access to lobbying records                  X         —         —          X           —         —       X      X       X          X
                                             Code of conduct required for registered lobbyists    X         —         —          —           X         —       X      X       X          —
95
      Holman and Luneburg



   The United Kingdom, engulfed in its own lobbying scandal, is on the verge
of adopting a strong system of lobbying regulation. A select committee of the
UK House of Commons produced a study in 2009 that strongly recommended
adoption of a mandatory system of lobbyist registration and disclosure (Grice,
2011). The three major professional lobbying associations in the United
Kingdom – the Chartered Institute of Public Relations, the Association of
Professional Political Consultants and the Public Relations Consultants
Association – made a concerted effort to self-regulate the industry as an
alternative to mandatory regulation. The professional associations set up the
UK Public Affairs Council in which lobbyists are encouraged to register and
abide by a lobbyist code of ethics. Some of the associations even post their
lobbyist registrations online.
   However, like many of the efforts of self-regulation throughout Europe,
the UK self-regulation effort has been crippled by several inherent flaws.
First, and most importantly, the registration requirement is only imposed on
those who wish to join the professional associations. Those who choose to
remain outside the UK Public Affairs Council or the three professional
associations avoid the registration and disclosure requirements. Lawyers, law
firms, think tanks and others who are often heavily involved in affecting
public policy feel no compulsion to register as lobbyists – and they generally
do not register. This lack of participation in the voluntary association-run
registry deprives the public of a full picture of the influence-peddling business
and, of concern to the lobbying profession itself, applies the lobbyist
regulations unequally, with those who do not register escaping restrictions on
their lobbying conduct.
   Second, enforcement for violations of the associations’ code of ethics tends to be
minimal at best. Where self-regulation prevails, including in the United Kingdom,
enforcement actions are limited to reprimands or expulsion from the association
(if they occur at all) (Holman and Susman, 2009). As a result, efforts at self-
regulation, however noble, tend to fall short of expectations, especially in nations
where lobbyist corruption is perceived as a major problem.
   The self-regulation effort in the United Kingdom appears to be failing, as
one of the three associations recently joined in the calls for government
regulation (Wright and Newman, 2011). The House of Commons’ committee
recommendations for a mandatory registry are widely expected to become law
in the United Kingdom within the next few years.
   Elsewhere across Europe, Croatia, the Czech Republic, Ireland and several
other European nations are also well into legislative deliberations for lobbyist
regulation based on goals of reining in corruption and enhancing public
confidence in government through full transparency. Much of Europe appears
to be turning the tide from weak regulatory regimes into strong systems of
lobbying regulation.
96   r 2012 Macmillan Publishers Ltd. 2047-7414   Interest Groups & Advocacy   Vol. 1, 1, 75–104
                                                                      Lobbying and transparency



Lobbyists’ Attitudes on Regulation

Although many European governments grapple with the issue of regulating
lobbyists, surveys show that lobbyists themselves are generally supportive of
registration and public disclosure of lobbying activities. In the United States
and Brussels and across Europe as a whole, lobbyists overwhelmingly favor
creation of a lobbyist registry and applaud transparency of their work. The
greatest presumed obstacle to the regulation of lobbying – lobbyists themselves
fighting tooth-and-nail against such regulation– is largely a myth.
   One survey of lobbyist attitudes conducted in 2008 included a wide spectrum
of lobbyists in both the United States and Brussels (Holman, 2009). Overall,
the professional lobbyists surveyed expressed general comfort with the concept
of a lobbyist registry, in which lobbyists must register with a governmental
agency and the registration lists are made public. Only 8.1 per cent of all
American and Brussels lobbyists surveyed indicated that there should be no
type of public registry for lobbyists. More than a quarter of respondents (25.7
per cent) would prefer a voluntary system of lobbyist registration, in which a
lobbyist would receive some benefit, such as early notices of pending legislative
action, in exchange for registering. However, a substantial majority (66.2
per cent) of all American and Brussels lobbyists favored a system of mandatory
registration for lobbyists and lobbying firms that meets some threshold of
lobbying activity, similar to the American and Canadian systems of mandatory
lobbyist registration.
   As shown in Figure 1, when broken down by jurisdiction, all respondents
who expressed a preference for a voluntary system of registration are based in
Brussels. Nearly all American lobbyists expressed support for a mandatory

                             120
                                   Country
                             100      US
                                      EU                            96
                              80


                   Percent    60

                                                                           49
                              40
                                                         40

                              20
                                             11
                               0
                                        No         Voluntary       Mandatory
                                                   Registry
Figure 1: Should government maintain a publicly disclosed registry of lobbyists?

      r 2012 Macmillan Publishers Ltd. 2047-7414    Interest Groups & Advocacy   Vol. 1, 1, 75–104   97
      Holman and Luneburg



system of lobbyist registration. Small minorities in both jurisdictions preferred
no registry at all.
  Another finding that is notable in Figure 1: more EU lobbyists expressed
preference for a mandatory system of registration than a voluntary system. The
ETI of the EC has proceeded as a voluntary system largely out of concern that
a wave of opposition to a mandatory registry will come from the lobbying
community. The finding here suggests that such a wave of opposition to a
mandatory registry may not materialize.
  In another survey of lobbyists across Europe, not just in Brussels, a large
majority of European professional lobbyists specifically favored a mandatory
system of lobbyist registration (Holman and Susman, 2009). Europe-wide,
lobbyists seem to agree that registration and disclosure should be mandatory.
As shown in Figure 2, more than 61 per cent of all European respondents
believed that a lobbyist registration and transparency program should be
‘mandatory for all lobbyists’. Approximately 18 per cent of respondents
preferred a voluntary system of registration and disclosure, and 15 per cent
were ‘neutral’ on the issue.
  This support for a mandatory lobbyist registry again comes from all
categories of European lobbyists, with 80.6 per cent of non-profit lobbyists
favoring a mandatory system, 57 per cent of contract lobbyists supporting
mandatory registration and disclosure, and 56 per cent of corporate lobbyists
supporting the same. Mandatory versus voluntary registration and disclosure
of lobbying activity is simply not an area of much dispute in either the United
States or Europe – at least not within the lobbying community.
  There are several reasons why lobbyists support transparency of their profession,
but the most often cited reason according to these surveys is to persuade the public
that lobbying activity is a legitimate part of the policymaking process, not a
behind-the-scenes influence peddling scheme. Although 57 per cent of European


                        Voluntary
                            18.5%




                  Neutral
                  14.8%
                                                                      Mandatory
                                                                      61.4%
                           NA
                         5.3%

Figure 2: Should transparency of lobbying activity be mandatory or voluntary?

98    r 2012 Macmillan Publishers Ltd. 2047-7414   Interest Groups & Advocacy   Vol. 1, 1, 75–104
                                                                     Lobbying and transparency



lobbyists believe that ethical transgressions by lobbyists are rarely or never a
problem, 90 per cent of those lobbyists admitted that the public perceives there is
such a problem (Holman and Susman, 2009). The lobbying profession in both
Europe and North America widely recognizes that there is no better way to begin
addressing this problem of perception than through transparency.


Conclusion: Achieving Adequate Lobbying Transparency – Lessons
Learned

The regulation of lobbying may take a variety of forms and seek differing
goals, such as limiting political contributions from or bundled by lobbyists that
may contribute to unequal access to decision makers. However, the authors
begin with the assumption that, whatever else lobbying regulation seeks to
accomplish, enhancing transparency must be a foundational building block for
the regulatory effort. Opening the books on lobbying activity and govern-
mental policymaking is essential to reducing the opportunity for corruption, as
well as the appearance of corruption. With maximizing transparency in mind,
the successes and failures of lobbying regulation both in North America and
across Europe highlight several important elements that are necessary elements
of an effective lobbying disclosure regime.

First, lobbyist registration must be mandatory. When lobbyists in the United
States could effectively determine on their own whether they passed the
threshold for registration under the law as it existed between 1946 and 1995,
only about 25 per cent of lobbyists bothered to register. Similarly in Europe we
see that the voluntary registration programs, even when coupled with
incentives for lobbyists to register, fare very poorly in capturing most lobbyists
and lobbying organizations in the registry. In light of the high level of support
among lobbyists for mandatory registration, the low level of registration might
be explained by concerns regarding the competitive disadvantages of registration
when others are not required to register.
   Furthermore, if registration and disclosure are not uniform across all sectors
and business interests, the registration records will not reflect the reality of money
and influence peddling. A registration system that applies only to contract
lobbyists overlooks most of the corporations, unions and other special interests
that are attempting to influence public policy. It is a simple matter for a business
interest to employ its own lobbyist rather than contract out for services as a
means to evade disclosure. Those who have reason to hide will likely do so.

Second, the transparency law must precisely define who must register. Clear
definitions are key to the success of lobbying disclosure law. Without that,
      r 2012 Macmillan Publishers Ltd. 2047-7414   Interest Groups & Advocacy   Vol. 1, 1, 75–104   99
      Holman and Luneburg



those who want to evade disclosure will simply argue that they do not meet the
registration threshold. It is not sufficient to declare that those whose ‘primary
purpose’ is to influence legislation must register. That leaves the judgment
largely in the hands of the person whose activities should be subject to scrutiny.
A lawyer, for example, may argue that his or her primary purpose is client
counseling, not lobbying.
   The law should cover both ‘in-house’ lobbyists, who are employed by an entity
to lobby on its behalf, and ‘outside’ lobbyists, who work alone or with others in a
lobbying firm to advance the interests of third-party clients for compensation.
With regard to both groups, the thresholds for registration should be quantifiable,
for example, (i) receiving more than de minimis financial compensation for
lobbying; (ii) making more than one lobbying contact with ‘covered officials’; and/
or (iii) engaging in a minimum amount of lobbying work on behalf of any
particular client or organization. Time periods applicable to such elements (for
example, a semiannual or quarterly period) must also be specified.

Third, mandated registration and periodic reports must contain useful informa-
tion that can help the public understand who is trying to influence whom and on
what issues. Ideally, these records should identify, at a minimum, individual
lobbyists, their employers, their clients (including organizations that are
members of lobbying coalitions), specific issues lobbied, legislators and
executive officials contacted and, most importantly, income earned by
lobbying firms and expenditures for lobbying made by self-lobbying entities.
Whether disclosures should include a detailed summary of the actual
communications with contacted officials is a more difficult issue given the
reporting burdens created.
   Uncovering corruption or its appearance is almost always a matter of
following the money. High lobbying fees or lobbying expenses may suggest the
need for further inquiry. The amount of money any particular client or
business invests in affecting legislation is the information that the public needs
to know in evaluating whether public policies are being made based on merit or
on the expenditure of money. The specific identities of the lobbyists handling
the money, as well as the identities of lawmakers whom the lobbyists contacted,
is valuable information to enforcement authorities in connecting the dots
between money and undue influence. In the United States, extraordinarily high
fees paid by Indian tribes to lobbyist Jack Abramoff as disclosed under the
LDA started investigators down the trail to his ultimate guilty plea and
subsequent imprisonment (Schmidt, 2004).

Fourth, lobbyists must file registrations and reports electronically, and the
disclosure database must be available to the public on the Internet in a searchable,
sortable and downloadable format. An effective transparency program should
100   r 2012 Macmillan Publishers Ltd. 2047-7414   Interest Groups & Advocacy   Vol. 1, 1, 75–104
                                                                    Lobbying and transparency



be administered by a single agency that collects all registration and periodic
reports through instantaneous electronic means and administers a centralized
disclosure system on the Internet. In order to make lobbyist activity reports
publicly available in a timely fashion and keep the disclosure agency from
being overwhelmed with paperwork, lobbyists should be required to file their
reports electronically, through a filing program approved by the administrative
agency. The database should then be provided on the Internet by the
administrative agency in a searchable, sortable and downloadable format, so
that the data can be easily searched and organized by the public and even
downloaded by independent researchers into preferred data processing
programs. The selected search engine should allow search not only by
categories of information provided on forms that are filed, but also by words
and phrases to maximize accessibility of information contained in the database.
  Public examination of these reports is not only critical to building the
public’s trust in the governmental process, but it also complements
enforcement. By placing this information on the Internet for all to see, the
public provides critical backup for monitoring compliance with the law.

Fifth, the lobbyist registration system should be enforced by an independent gov-
ernmental agency, not by lawmakers, lobbyists or those accountable to the law-
makers or lobbyists. The transparency system in the United States, for example,
is handicapped by the fact that, or at least suspect because, monitoring
compliance is left largely to officers directly employed by Congress whose
Members’ interest is not always aligned with the goal of transparency. It would
also be constructive to fund the enforcement agency by means of permanent
(or at least long term) appropriations in order to minimize the possibility of
angry lawmakers defunding the agency. One option here would be to create a
system financed, at least in part, by fees paid by registrants and their clients.
   Of course, despite its foundational nature to effective lobbyist regulation,
transparency may not be enough fully to protect the interests threatened by
lobbying practices. The additional components of the regime may include a
variety of regulatory restrictions, but one is of signal importance. A code of
ethics restricting the most egregious patterns of undue influence peddling –
generally focused on the potentially corrupting nexus between lobbyists,
money and lawmakers – should govern the behavior of lobbyists and
governmental officials alike. Canada has taken the lead in this effort by
codifying ethical standards for all registered lobbyists designed to prevent
worrisome conflicts of interest. The United States, only in response to the
recent Abramoff lobbying scandal, has promulgated a series of ethics rules
restricting gifts from lobbyists to senior governmental officials and lobbyist-
sponsored travel for members of Congress and their staff. Regulating ethical
standards is far more controversial than transparency, and not an idea that is
     r 2012 Macmillan Publishers Ltd. 2047-7414   Interest Groups & Advocacy   Vol. 1, 1, 75–104   101
       Holman and Luneburg



yet as widely accepted in either North America or Europe. Transparency
provides the opportunity and incentive for most lobbyists and government
officials to steer clear of conflicts of interest. But, where transparency is not
sufficient incentive, ethics codes may be necessary.


Notes

1 The lobbyist registration system adopted by Australia deserves special mention because it is fairly
  well developed, though the Pacific nation is not included in this study. In 2008, Australia adopted
  the ‘Lobbying Code of Conduct’, requiring anyone who attempts to influence legislative or
  administrative policies on behalf of third parties (contract lobbyists) to register their names,
  contact information and identities of their clients. Lobbyist and client identities are made
  available to the public online. No financial information is provided nor are the issues lobbied
  disclosed. The Australian registry is available at lobbyists.pmc.gov.au/conduct_code.cfm.
2 The description of the United States and Canadian lobbying law contained in this section draws
  on Chapters 3–6 of Luneburg et al (2009), and also on Hughes and MacDonald (2011). It should
  be noted that the lobbying disclosure systems found at the state level in the United States and at
  the provincial level in Canada may differ in material respects from the descriptions provided in
  this article for the lobbying regulation regimes operating at the federal (national) level in both
  countries.
3 Neither the federal disclosure system in the United States nor the one in Canada are, obviously,
  without flaws. For example, a Task Force on Federal Lobbying Laws (2011), formed by the
  Administrative Law & Regulatory Practice Section of the American Bar Association, has
  recommended significant changes to the LDA broadening disclosure. See its report, Lobbying
  Law in the Spotlight: Challenges and Proposed Improvements, available at www.americanbar
  .org/content/dam/aba/migrated/2011_build/administrative_law/lobbying_task_force_report_010311
  .authcheckdam.pdf. And in March 2011, Canada’s Commissioner of Lobbying issued a report
  recommending a variety of improvements to the disclosure regime administered by her. See Office of
  the Commissioner of Lobbying (2011) Administering the Lobbying Act: Observations and
  Recommendation Based on the Experience of the Last Five Years, available at www.ocl-cal.gc.ca/
  eic/site/lobbyist-lobbyiste1.nsf/vwapj/Administering_LA-eng.pdf/$FILE/Administering_LA-eng.pdf.
4 E-mail from Mathias Huter, Senior Analyst and Program Manager, Transparency International –
  Georgia (4 February 2011), on file with the authors.
5 Access to the registries for both the European Commission and the European Parliament is
  available at europa.eu/lobbyists/interest_representative_registers/index_en.html.
6 Disclosure of lobbying contacts in Slovenia is available on the Web page of the Commission for
  Prevention of Corruption at www.kpk-rs.si/sl/projekt-transparentnost/lobisticni-stiki.



References

ALTER-EU. (2011) Cash-for-Amendments scandal just the tip of the Iceberg. 30 March,
  http://blog.brusselssunshine.eu/2011/03/cash-for-amendments-scandal-just-tip-of.html, accessed
  3 December 2011.
ALTER-EU. (2010) Transparency still out of sight on registry’s second anniversary. 23 June,
  http://www.alter-eu.org/press-releases/2010/06/23/eu-lobby-register-at-2-year-anniversary, accessed
  3 December 2011.

102    r 2012 Macmillan Publishers Ltd. 2047-7414   Interest Groups & Advocacy   Vol. 1, 1, 75–104
                                                                     Lobbying and transparency



Barrett, D. (2011) Publisher admits lying in Rangel probe. Wall Street Journal blog, 14 April,
   http://blogs.wsj.com/metropolis/2011/04/14/publisher-admits-lying-in-rangel-probe/?mod=
   google_news_blog, accessed 2 January 2012.
Brandeis, L.D. (1913) What publicity can do. Harper’s Weekly 20 December.
Dinan, W. (2011) Lobbying transparency and the ‘actually existing’ European public sphere. Paper
   presented at the 1st Global Conference on Transparency Research, Rutgers University, http://
   spaa.newark.rutgers.edu/images/stories/documents/Transparency_Research_Conference/Papers/
   Dinan_William.pdf.
EurActiv. (2005) Brussels lobbyists to come under tighter scrutiny, http://www.euractiv.com/pa/
   brussels-lobbyists-come-tighter-scrutiny/article-136454, accessed 2 January 2012.
European Commission. (2011) The Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia Progress Report 2011.
   Brussels, Belgium: European Commission, http://ec.europa.eu/enlargement/pdf/key_documents/
   2011/package/mk_rapport_2011_en.pdf.
European Commission. (2006) Eurobarometer 65. Brussels, Belgium: European Commission.
Grice, A. (2011) Lobbying clean-up is delayed – After lobbying. The Independent 18 October.
Holman, C. (2009) Lobbying reform in the United States and the European Union: Progress on
   two continents. In: C. McGrath (ed.), Interest Groups and Lobbying in the United States, and
   Comparative Perspectives. Lewiston, ME: Edwin Mellen Press.
Holman, C. and Susman, T. (2009) Self-Regulation and Regulation of the Lobbying Profession.
   Paris, France: OECD Global Forum on Public Governance.
Hughes, J. and MacDonald, C.P. (2011) Lobbying and lobbyist registration in Canada. In:
   W.V. Luneburg, T.M. Susman and R.H. Gordon (eds.), The Lobbying Manual: A Complete Guide
   to Federal Lobbying Law and Practice, 4th edn. supplement. Chicago, IL: American Bar Association.
Kanins, V. (2011) Transparency in Lobbying: A Comparative Review of Existing and Emerging
   Regulatory Regimes. Riga, Latvia: Centre for Public Policy.
Luneburg, W.V., Susman, T.M. and Gordon, R.H. (eds.) (2009) The Lobbying Manual: A Complete
   Guide to Federal Lobbying Law and Practice, 4th edn. Chicago, IL: American Bar Association.
Office of the Commissioner of Lobbying. (2011) Administering the Lobbying Act: Observations and
   Recommendation Based on the Experience of the Last Five Years. Ottawa, ON: Office of the
   Commissioner of Lobbying.
Piasecka, A. (2007) Lithuania. Washington DC: Freedom House.
Piotrowski, S. and Liao, Y. (2011) The usability of government information: The necessary link
   between transparency and participation. Paper presented at the 1st Global Conference on
   Transparency Research, Rutgers University, http://spaa.newark.rutgers.edu/images/stories/
   documents/Transparency_Research_Conference/Papers/Piotrowski_and_Liao.pdf, accessed
   1 October 2011.
Policy and Management Consulting Group. (2010) PMCG is lobbying the draft law on accounting
   and audits, http://www.pmcg.ge/index.php?option=com_content&view=article&id=105:pmcg-is-
   lobbying-the-draft-law-on-accounting-and-audit&catid=19:public-sector&Itemid=19, accessed 8
   February 2011.
Schmidt, S. (2004) A jackpot from Indian gaming tribes. Washington Post 22 February.
Task Force on Federal Lobbying Laws. (2011) Lobbying Law in the Spotlight: Challenges and
   Proposed Improvements. Washington DC: Administrative & Regulatory Practice Section of the
   American Bar Association.
Tovar, J.C.M. (2011) Information, accountability, and quality of democracy. Paper presented at
   the 1st Global Conference on Transparency Research, Rutgers University, http://spaa.newark
   .rutgers.edu/images/stories/documents/Transparency_Research_Conference/Papers/Maldonado_
   Juan_Camilo.pdf, accessed 1 October 2011.
Warren, P.L. and Cordis, A.S. (2011) Sunshine as disinfectant: The effect of state freedom of
   information act laws on corruption. Paper presented at the 1st Global Conference on

      r 2012 Macmillan Publishers Ltd. 2047-7414   Interest Groups & Advocacy   Vol. 1, 1, 75–104   103
      Holman and Luneburg



  Transparency Research, Rutgers University, http://spaa.newark.rutgers.edu/images/stories/
  documents/Transparency_Research_Conference/Papers/Warren_Patrick.pdf, accessed 1 October
  2011.
Washington Post. (2005) Investigating Abramoff – A Special Report, 22 June, http://www
  .washingtonpost.com/wp-dyn/content/linkset/2005/06/22/LI2005062200936.html, accessed 5 October
  2011.
Willis, A. (2011) Confusion reins over cash-for-amendments probe. EU Observer 28 March.
Wright, O. and Newman, M. (2011) Death knell for self-regulation as lobbyist watchdog collapses.
  The Independent 10 December.




104   r 2012 Macmillan Publishers Ltd. 2047-7414   Interest Groups & Advocacy   Vol. 1, 1, 75–104
