LobbyView: Firm-level Lobbying & Congressional
Bills Database∗
In Song Kim†
August 30, 2018
Abstract
A vast literature demonstrates the signiﬁcance for policymaking of lobbying by special inter-
est groups. Yet, empirical studies of political representation have been limited by the diﬃculty
of observing a direct connection between politicians and interest groups. This article introduces
LobbyView, a comprehensive lobbying database that is based on the universe of lobbying reports
ﬁled under the Lobbying Disclosure Act of 1995. LobbyView bridges two distinct observable
political behaviors with regard to congressional bills: (1) sponsorship by politicians, and (2)
reported lobbying by interest groups. It also allows researchers to identify political actors and
their lobbying activities based on standardized ﬁrm- and industry-level identiﬁers to facilitate
systemic research on lobbying and merging with external datasets. Finally, we develop an API
(Application Programming Interface) that enables researchers to bulk download the massive
amount of unstructured data in standard formats so that they can conduct further analyses
using preferred statistical software.
∗Financial support from the National Science Foundation is acknowledged (SES-1264090 and SES-1725235).
†Associate Professor, Department of Political Science, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA,
02139. Email: insong@mit.EDU, URL: http://web.mit.edu/insong/www/

1 Introduction
This document currently contains only some technical details of the database. We will soon update
this paper to provide a full description of the methods used for constructing the database. Speciﬁ-
cally, we will show 1) how we disambiguate interest group names using natural language processing
(NLP) as well as collaborative ﬁltering, 2) how the complex relational structure is stored using
PostgreSQL and Elasticsearch, and 3) the scalability of our methods for bill number and bill title
matching described in Section 2. Moreover, we will conduct several descriptive and statistical anal-
yses to demonstrate the scope and quality of the lobbying database. Until then, we refer readers
to the following two papers for an introduction to LobbyView.
References
Kim, In Song. 2017. “Political Cleavages within Industry: Firm-level Lobbying for Trade Liberal-
ization.” American Political Science Review 111 (1): 1–20.
Kim, In Song, and Dmitriy Kunisky. 2018. “Mapping Political Communities: A Statistical Analysis
of Lobbying Networks in Legislative Politics.” Working paper available athttp://web.mit.edu/
insong/www/pdf/network.pdf.
2 Identifying Bills and Missing Congress Numbers
Identifying congressional bills in lobbying reports is diﬃcult because bill numbers are repeated
across Congresses, and often do not appear directly annotated with Congress numbers in lobbing
reports. Using the report ﬁling year to guess the Congress often leads to erroneous matches, because
reports ﬁled at the beginning of a new Congress tend to include disclosures of lobbying activities
from the previous year (and therefore, if a new Congress has begun recently, from the previous
Congress as well). For example, consider the following lobbying report ﬁled by Google, Inc. in
2013. It reads:
Monitor legislation regarding online privacy including Safe Data Act (H.R. 2577, S. 1207) and Do not track
proposals (H.R. 654). Monitor any Congressional or Administration eﬀorts to impose privacy laws on search
engines. Monitor Spectrum acts (S. 911, H.R. 2482).
Figure 1: First Quarter Report by Google, Inc. in 2013
A naive guess would be that the bill H.R. 2577 refers to a bill from the 113th Congress, because
the report was ﬁled in 2013. However, it is clear from the report that this is a bill from the 112th
Congress, the “SAFE Data Act.” We use the following strategies to mitigate this problem and
correctly identify Congress session numbers under various circumstances.
1

1. Bill Number Search: We ﬁrst identify bill numbers (e.g., H.R. 2577 above) using regular
expression search in the report text. In the above example in Figure 1, our algorithm would
identify bill numbers H.R. 2577, S. 1207, H.R. 654, S. 911, and H.R. 2482. Note that all of
these bills are from the 112th Congress rather than the 113th.
2. Congress Identiﬁcation: Given a bill number found in a speciﬁc issue text (a section of
the lobbying report), we attempt to identify the most likely Congress to which that bill would
belong using other text around the bill number. We consider a range of candidate Congresses
extending backwards from the Congress containing the year that the lobbying report was
ﬁled. By default, we consider the three preceding Congresses; in the above example, there-
fore, we would consider the 113th, 112th, and 111th Congresses. We then retrieve the bills
having the same number as the given bill from each of these Congresses (omitting the Con-
gresses that do not have a bill of that number), and compute a bag-of-words representation
(after a tokenization and stopword ﬁltering pipeline) of each of those bills, producing vectors
v1, . . . ,vn representing the n candidate bills. We also compute the same representation of
the text around the mention of the bill number in the lobbying report, producing a vector
w representing that text. We then choose the Congress number by maximizing the cosine
similarity between the vi and w, choosing bill i∗ with index given by
i∗ = argmax
1≤i≤n
v⊤
i w
∥vi∥∥w∥ . (1)
If no bill having the same number exists in the entire range of Congresses we consider, we
simply guess that the bill comes from the Congress of the year the lobbying report was ﬁled.
3. Congress Propagation: If we successfully ﬁnd a match for a Congress, it may be propa-
gated to the other bills mentioned in the lobbying report, since, being scheduled on a quarterly
basis, lobbying report will almost always only mention legislation from a single Congress. If
diﬀerent bills in a lobbying report disagree on the best-matching Congress, a majority vote
may be taken, but this rarely occurs in practice.
4. Bill Title Search: Bills are sometimes only referred to by titles or alternate names. To
account for this, we clean and tokenize the speciﬁc issue sections of the lobbying report, and
perform a text matching operation against a table of bill titles. For instance, this operation
would identify “Safe Data Act” in our previous example, even if the bill number H.R. 2577
were not mentioned.
5. Bill Range Expansion: It is also common for bills with nearby numbers to be related,
and for lobbying reports to refer to ranges of bills when lobbying all of them at once. For
2

instance, a lobbying report ﬁled by Mattel, Inc. in 2002 contains the following text:
“H.R.3009, Trade Act of 2002. Certain miscellaneous tariﬀ bills to suspend the rates of
duty on certain toy-related articles (H.R.4182-4186; S.2099-2103). WTO market access
negotiations for non-agricultural products Port and border security measures”
Figure 2: Midyear Report by Mattel, Inc. in 2002
Therefore, if we ﬁnd two bill numbers that are close (by default, we take this to mean that
they share the same preﬁx and their numbers diﬀer by at most 10), then we consider all
other bills with numbers in between as also being lobbied in the same report. For instance,
the pattern “H.R. 4182-4186” in the excerpt shown in Figure 2 would be expanded into bills
H.R. 4182, H.R. 4183, H.R. 4184, H.R. 4185, and H.R. 4186, all of which we would consider
lobbied on by Mattel, Inc.
3 Technical Details
This document concerns the code in the /trade/code/database directory of our repository, which
sets up and provides access to a system of databases (running on SQLite and the Whoosh text
indexing library) that store relationships between bills, their lobbiers, and various other related
pieces of data.
3.1 Dependencies
The table below is a summary of the packages on which the database depends, along with a short
summary of the functionalities that they provide (further information and documentation can be
easily found on their PyPI (Python Package Index) pages). The packages are roughly grouped
by their function (database, parsing, etc). For the purposes of actual deployment, the ﬁle that
manages these packages is database/REQUIREMENTS.
3

Package Description
SQLAlchemy Basic Python bindings and model representations for SQL-type
databases.
Elixir Higher-level abstractions for dealing with SQL-type databases, extend-
ing the functionality that SQLAlchemy makes available.
Whoosh A library for creating full-text index databases that are searchable with
reasonable eﬃciency (if in the future better eﬃciency here is needed,
there are non-Python packages that can do a better job). SQL is not
good, generally speaking, for full-text search, hence the necessity of this
for the bill CRS summaries and lobbying report speciﬁc issue texts.
BeautifulSoup Convenient library for parsing XML and HTML data into Python ob-
jects, although when speed becomes an issue there are faster but less
convenient (and more code-verbose) alternatives, such as xml.etree in
the core Python library.
nltk The “natural language toolkit” for Python, providing tools for tokenizing
and statistically analyzing English-language texts.
path.py Convenience tools to make dealing with the ﬁlesystem easier from
Python.
python-dateutil Convenience tools for dealing with datetimes and time ranges.
Before going any further, you will need to install all of these packages, which can be conveniently
done through the REQUIREMENTS ﬁle, by running the following command in the shell (you will need
the pip utility for Python package management):
> pip install -r REQUIREMENTS
Also, there are a few subpackages to install for the nltk package. In a Python interpreter, run
the following:
>>> import nltk
>>> nltk.download()
That will open up an interface for downloading extras/packages for nltk. Then, you should go
into the Corpora tab and install the packages stopwords and wordnet. If no errors arise during
this installation procedure, it is safe to proceed to the next steps.
4

4 Getting Started
4.1 Conﬁguration
All of the necessary conﬁguration for the database system can be done by modifying the variables
in general.py. The variables are listed below along with the eﬀect that they have on the database
creation process. Realistically speaking, to get things working locally you should just change
DATA DIR to something that is not Della-speciﬁc. Everything else should be (more or less) good to
go, assuming no large repository reorganizations have happened.
Variable Description
TEST MODE Intended as a testing mode for bill detection and related
algorithms, but this is not yet complete, so avoid setting
this to True before taking a look at the testing code.
CONGRESSES The range of congresses that all processes will be concerned
with (note that in Python, the range(x, y) syntax gives
the numbers x, x + 1, . . . , y− 1, not including y).
OUTPUT DIR The directory for generic outputs of analytics scripts.
ROOT DIR The database directory (these directories are given relative
to the trade/code directory).
DATA DIR The directory used for storing databases, which can be to-
tally separate from the code directories. For instance, on
Della it is useful to put this under /tigress since it requires
lots of storage space.
LOBBY REPO DIR The location of the lobby repository (parallel to the trade
repository in the current setup).
CLIENT NAME MATCHES FILE The ﬁle containing the client name ﬁltering matches (i.e. the
output of Josh’s script).
4.2 Initialization
Installing the databases is (or should be) very easy, just go to the trade/code directory and run
the command sudo python -m database.setup . This will probably take a very long time to run
from scratch—possibly up to several days.
5

5 Working with the Database
5.1 Starting and Ending Sessions
In order to get started with a database session, navigate to the trade/code directory, and run the
following sequence of commands in the Python interpreter:
>>> import database.general
>>> from database.bills.models import *
>>> from database.lda.models import *
>>> from database.firms.models import *
>>> database.general.init_db()
When ﬁnished, the following command will safely close the database without accidentally perma-
nently writing any changes that may have been made to the data:
>>> database.general.close_db(write=False)
If you are in fact correcting errors in the database or otherwise performing operations that cause
changes that you would like permanently registered, then just change the above to instead pass
the argument write=True.
5.2 Basic Database Objects and Relationships
To see what objects are stored in the various databases, look at themodels.py ﬁles in the directories
bills, lda, and firms (the imports described above are what give you access to all of these classes).
Each class has some ﬁelds, where are available to access on any object of the class. The system is
best clariﬁed with an example: consider the case of bill objects, which are represented by the Bill
class. This class, like any other, has an id ﬁeld that is its primary key , i.e. the value of this ﬁeld
uniquely identiﬁes a Bill object. For bills, the id is a string of the form 110 HR7311, where 110 is
the number of the congress to which this bill belongs, and HR7311 is the bill number. To retrieve
a particular bill by its id, use the following snippet:
>>> b = Bill.query.get(’110_HR7311’)
Once this command completes, the object b will have all of the ﬁelds listed under Bill in the
ﬁle bills/models.py. So, for instance, we can get the date that the bill was introduced with
b.introduced, get its CRS summary text with b.summary, and so forth. Any ﬁeld inside Bill
that is initialized as Field(ABC) where ABC is some text (example possible values are Integer for
integer ﬁelds, Unicode(L) for a string ﬁeld of maximum length L, or DateTime for a date/time
ﬁeld) is accessed in this straightforward way.
6

Other ﬁelds are registered as ManyToMany(ABC), ManyToOne(ABC), or OneToMany(ABC), where
ABC is now the name of some other model. These ﬁelds contain references to one or more instances
of some other model. For instance, in Bill, the ﬁeld deﬁnition
titles = OneToMany(’BillTitle’)
indicates that each bill has one or more (hence Many) associated objects of class BillTitle, which
are its titles. In BillTitle, we see the ﬁeld giving the reverse relation,
bill = ManyToOne(’Bill’)
which indicates that many BillTitle objects can share the same Bill object (for some intuition,
think of a OneToMany ﬁeld as a “my children” relation, and of a ManyToOne ﬁeld as a “my parent”
relation).
Thus, if b is a Bill object, then b.titles will give an iterable (eﬀectively a Python list, for all
basic purposes) containing all the titles of b. Conversely, if t is a BillTitle object, then t.bill
is the Bill object to which the title belongs.
The last possibility of these more complex relationships is a ManyToMany ﬁeld, which as its
name suggests creates a generic relation between two object types (where neither object plays the
“child” or “parent” role). For example, we see in Bill,
terms = ManyToMany(’Term’)
and in Term,
bills = ManyToMany(’Bill’)
which means that for a bill b, looking at b.terms gives all of the terms that that bill is classiﬁed
under, and for a term t, looking at t.bills gives all bills under that term.
5.3 Filtering Operations
The more sophisticated and interesting sorts of queries that are possible are those that involve not
just fetching particular bills or other objects and examining their relationships, but also involve
ﬁltering sets of objects by useful criteria.
Example: ﬁlter by columns of each Model
>>> reports = LobbyingReport.query.\
filter_by(year=2011)
7

returns all lobbying reports ﬁled in 2011
Example: ﬁlter by membership in at least one ManyToMany related table
>>> trade = LobbyingReport.query.\
filter(LobbyingReport.issues.any(LobbyingIssue.code.\
in_([’TRADE (DOMESTIC/FOREIGN)’])))
>>> trade.count()
52418
returns all lobbying reports that at least has ’TRADE (DOMESTIC/FOREIGN)’ as one of issues
lobbied.
5.4 Full-Text Indices
Two types of data items are duplicated in a separate full-text index database to facilitate more
eﬃcient searching: the CRS summary text of each bill, and the text of each lobbying report
speciﬁc issue. The code concerning the creation and access of these indices is found in the ﬁles
bills/ix utils.py and lda/ix utils.py, respectively.
The primary useful methods, in turn, for accessing these indices are summary search and
issue search, in the above two ﬁles respectively. These both take one required argument, called
queries list, which is a list of the queries (as strings) to make to the full-text index. They also
have two optional boolean arguments, return objects and make phrase, which default to False.
Setting return objects to True will return a collection of Bill or LobbyingSpecificIssue
Python objects rather than just their id values. Setting make phrase to True will make each
query into a phrase that is searched for a single unit, rather than separately searching for each
word (as in the diﬀerence when searching Google for red cat running versus “red cat running” in
quotes).
In lda/ix utils.py, there is an additional method exposed for using the index that is called
get bill specific issues by titles, which is a simple special case ofissue search that searches
for all of the titles of a particular bill in the speciﬁc issues, used in the database construction process
to ﬁnd the bills mentioned by title in speciﬁc issues.
A simple example of using these indices to ﬁnd bills pertaining to a particular textually-
distinguished subject (trade-related bills in our case) can be found inanalytics/lobbied bills data.py.
We deﬁne a list of queries on our bills in the following way:
from database.analytics.bill_utils import *
bill_queries = [
u’trade barrier’,
8

u’tariff barrier’,
...
u’uruguay round’,
u’harmonized tariff schedule’
]
Then, to get the id’s of the bills that contain one of these phrases, we do this:
query_bill_ids = database.bills.ix_utils.summary_search(
bill_queries,
make_phrase=True,
return_objects=False
)
This returns a list of id’s as strings. If we wanted the corresponding Bill objects instead, we
could instead pass the argument return objects=True. Note that here it is important that we
use make phrase=True, since otherwise the query ’uruguay round’ would match all bills that
contain both the word uruguay and the word round, not necessarily together, which is not what
we want.
A simple example of using these indices to ﬁnd lobbying reports that contain a particular
phrase,
from database.analytics.lda_utils import *
reports = lda_issue_search(
[’Free trade agreements with South Korea’]
)
5.5 Calculating Herﬁndahl Indices for Industry Clients Belong to
We provide a tool to measure the size of each ﬁrm in relation to the industry. Herﬁndahl index
measures the levels of competition among ﬁrms (clients) within the same industry.
5.5.1 herﬁndahl.py (in lobby/code/hfcc)
Given lobbying database containing ﬁrm, LDA, and bill information,
1. Pulls ﬁrm-level ﬁnancial and LDA report information from lobbying database
2. Computes Herﬁndahl indices
3. Outputs rows with ﬁrm information (sorted by industry as identiﬁed by NAICS2), industry
Herﬁndahl index, and lobbying information for ﬁrm.
9

To run: From lobby/code, type ”python -m hfcc.herﬁndahl” No additional parameters needed.
5.5.2 herﬁndadd.py (in lobby/code/hfcc)
Given output (csv) ﬁles generated by herﬁndahl.py,
1. Adds indicator showing whether ﬁrm lobbied on at least one trade issue
2. Adds ﬁrm-level compustat ﬁnancial data
3. Generates (in addition) new csv ﬁles with industry-level information in rows
To run: Ensure output ﬁles from herﬁndahl.py are in lobby/code From lobby/code, type
“python -m hfcc.herﬁndadd” On-screen documentation will detail additional parameters that are
needed.
Example
python -m hfcc.herfindadd namerica naics -s 1996 -e 2011
runs the script for the North America ﬁles, using NAICS (rather than SIC), starting from 1996
and ending in 2011 (herﬁndahl.py generates one ﬁle per year per classiﬁcation system (NAICS /
SIC).)
10