Vol.:(0123456789)
Interest Groups & Advocacy (2020) 9:257–271
https://doi.org/10.1057/s41309-020-00101-0
ORIGINAL ARTICLE
The lobbying disclosure act at 25: Challenges 
and opportunities for analysis
Timothy M. LaPira1  · Herschel F. Thomas2
Published online: 28 August 2020 
© Springer Nature Limited 2020
Abstract
The Lobbying Disclosure Act (LDA) will turn 25 years old on December 19, 2020. 
Between 1998 and 2018, organizations and lobbying firms filed more than one mil-
lion reports. These reports provide information on the activity of 47,555 organi-
zations, 6834 lobbying firms, and 47,479 individual lobbyists. The interest group 
scholarly community has put the LDA data to good use over the course of a quarter 
century of observation. Yet, lobbying disclosures have not been fully leveraged to 
generate new discoveries about the politics of interest groups, advocacy, legislative 
studies, and public policy. In this article, we provide an overview of the lobbying 
disclosure process by describing the idiosyncrasies of the data’s nested and complex 
structure and the limitations of what information is actually reported. We then assess 
recent research using LDA data, provide advice on completing research at different 
levels of analysis, document important changes in data reliability and structure over 
time, and introduce replication tools to support further research. As the time hori-
zon of lobbying disclosure panel data continues to grow, the LDA—especially when 
combined with other sources—is an increasingly fruitful way to observe money in 
politics, legislative behavior, corporate political activity, political consulting, and 
individual lobbyists engaged in policy advocacy.
Keywords Lobbying · Interest groups · Lobbying Disclosure Act · Honest 
Leadership and Open Government Act · Policy Agendas Project · Compustat
Electronic supplementary material The online version of this article (https ://doi.org/10.1057/s4130 
9-020-00101 -0) contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.
 * Timothy M. LaPira 
 lapiratm@jmu.edu
 Herschel F. Thomas 
 herschel.thomas@mail.wvu.edu
1 Department of Political Science, James Madison University, 91 E Grace St., MSC 7705, 
Harrisonburg, VA 22807, USA
2 Department of Political Science, West Virginia University, 316 Woodburn Hall, PO Box 6317, 
Morgantown, WV 26506-6317, USA

258 T. M. LaPira, H. F . Thomas 
The Lobbying Disclosure Act (LDA) of 1995 1 represents a watershed moment for 
the study of interest group politics in the United States. For the first time, the law 
effectively compelled organized interests to disclose how much they spend on lob-
bying activities, who their lobbyists are, what government institutions they contact, 
what general policy areas they advocate, and what specific issues on which they 
lobby government at the US national level. Additionally, the law requires lobbyists 
who previously worked in government to publicly disclose their previous federal 
employment, thus codifying transparency about the revolving door between the gov-
ernment and the private sector into law.
Prior to the LDA, the system was a shambles. For all practical purposes, the dis-
closure regime under the Regulation of Lobbying Act (RLA) of 1946 was merely 
a voluntary system that only a select few major lobbying firms used, most likely as 
a way to promote their business. The RLA was useless for interest group scholars, 
who instead tended to use commercial directories such as Congressional Quarter -
ly’s Washington Information Directory (e.g., Walker 1983) or Washington Repre-
sentatives (e.g., Schlozman 1984; Schlozman and Tierney 1983, 1986; Heinz et al. 
1993). These directories tended to be limited to information identifying an organ-
ized interest, selected lobbyists, and public affairs employees. They do not document 
any actual lobbying behavior or advocacy activities. Simply, how much the LDA 
improved the public’s knowledge of what interests were seeking to influence public 
policy, what agents were hired to influence government, what issues they focused 
on, and to whom they were directing their advocacy cannot be overstated.
Incidentally, this new data treasure trove became available just as leading inter -
est group scholars were calling on the field to produce more generalizable, empiri-
cally driven research that accounted for the role of political institutions and eco-
nomic contexts across various jurisdictions and policy domains (Gray and Lowery 
1996; Baumgartner and Leech 1998). Baumgartner and Leech (2001) report on the 
first-ever dataset constructed from the LDA (see also Baumgartner and Leech 1999). 
Since the initial reports in 1996 were filed on paper, this project consisted of pains-
takingly hand-coding information by a team of supervised undergraduate students 
from 19,000 original files stored on microfiche. The article, which has been cited 
more than 500 times at the time of writing, describes the now familiar extreme value 
distribution of many balkanized issue niches versus a select handful of issues that 
attract the lion’s share of attention from organized interests. These findings were 
only possible because the LDA permitted the authors to account for the entire popu-
lation of organized interests at the federal level, not merely those consulting firms 
that voluntarily disclosed or associations that advertised in the lobbyist phonebook.
Much has changed since the publication of “Interest Niches and Policy Bandwag-
ons.” In 1998, the Secretary of the Senate began allowing filers to submit forms 
electronically, and in 2004, it began requiring electronic submission. Soon after in 
1 The original LDA was amended by the 2007 Honest Leadership and Open Government Act (HLOGA), 
Unless otherwise noted, we refer to the LDA as amended (2 USC. Section 1601 et. seq.) in general. All 
technical definitions may be found in “Lobbying Disclosure Act Guidance,” published by the Clerk of 
the House at https ://lobby ingdi sclos ure.house .gov/ldagu idanc e.pdf.

259
The lobbying disclosure act at 25: Challenges and opportunities…
2005, the nonprofit Center for Responsive Politics (CRP) began publishing lobbying 
disclosure data on OpenSecrets.org, a website long dedicated to publishing Federal 
Election Commission campaign finance information. The OpenSecrets.org Lobby -
ing Database significantly improves the raw government data by cleaning and reor -
ganizing it, resolving organization and lobbyist name ambiguities, and adding infor-
mation about organization’s primary economic activity. Academic research across 
disciplines that use lobbying disclosure reports skyrocketed once OpenSecrets.org 
data became available. We identify at least 85 peer-reviewed articles, chapters, and 
books that use LDA data as a primary source of empirical observation since the 
publication of Baumgartner and Leech (2001).
Though the LDA’s role in fostering large-scale empirical research on inter -
est groups and policy advocacy is remarkable, the lobbying disclosure regime and 
OpenSecrets.org data are still limited in many fundamental ways. There are a num-
ber of idiosyncrasies of the lobbying disclosure database that are not apparent from 
publicly available documentation from SOPR or OpenSecrets.org. Here, we describe 
the non-intuitive nested, complex structure of the lobbying database, report artificial 
influences on trends over time, systematically assess how scholars use the data, and 
offer ideas for best practices for analysis.
The artifactual structure of lobbying disclosure data
Lobbying disclosures contain a great deal of information, but the report format 
makes deciphering the data confusing to the uninitiated. This confusion is an artifact 
of the original paper LD-1 forms that organizations filed to register themselves in 
the system and the semiannual (and later quarterly) LD-2 forms that registrants use 
to report lobbying activities.
2 The US House and Senate maintain separate deposi-
tories of both LD-1 registrations and LD-2 reports, though most registrants now file 
identical reports to both chambers through a single electronic submission.
Nested lobbying disclosure format
The original paper LD-2 reports had a top cover sheet that identified the regis-
trant and client, listed contact information, and reported the aggregate amount of 
money spent or income earned, as well as the accounting method used to calculate 
that amount (Clemens 2014). Following the cover sheet, registrants then add one or 
more sheets for every pre-defined LDA Issue Area in which they were active.
3 The 
2 HLOGA added a new campaign donation reporting requirement for registered lobbyists. These reports 
do not disclose actual lobbying behavior, but rather donation behavior among a small percentage of lob-
byists (Koger and Victor 2009; Victor and Koger 2016; McKay 2018).
3 The original list included 72 issue areas; eight issue areas were added over time. See LaPira et  al. 
(2014) for an extended discussion of how many issue areas overlap substantively and how the list is inex-
haustive.

260 T. M. LaPira, H. F . Thomas 
issue area pages include names and “covered official” status 4 on lobbyists assigned 
to the Issue Area, an open-ended field briefly describing specific issues they advo-
cated, and federal “agencies” contacted.5 Since the number of issue areas varies for 
each interest group in each reporting period, it made sense for filers to simply add 
as many paper pages for as many issue areas they needed. When SOPR changed 
from paper to a digital system, they kept this page format as is even though doing 
so is inefficient from a database architecture perspective. The path-dependent conse-
quence of this seemingly arbitrary decision is that reports continue to contain infor -
mation in nested format. As we diagram in Fig.  1, information about lobbyists’ iden-
tities and congressional bills the interest groups advocate, if mentioned at all,
6 are 
nested within the superordinate information on how much money is spent.
At first glance, lobbying disclosures appear to permit researchers to answer 
straightforward questions like “how much a lobbyist earned from tobacco interests?” 
or “do proponents or opponents spend more money on gun control?” Yet, this nested 
Fig. 1  Hypothetical Lobbying disclosures by an organization
4 See “Lobbying Disclosure Act Guidance” for definitions. If a given lobbyist’s covered official status 
was reported either in the original LD-1 or any previous LD-2 report for a given client, the status does 
not need to be reported again. This peculiar practice significantly undercounts revolving door lobbyists 
(LaPira and Thomas 2014, 2017).
5 The US House and the US Senate are considered “agencies” under the LDA, which hides the actual 
members, committees, or party leaders and staff who are actually “contacted” by lobbyists.
6 Prior to 2005, it was very rare for registrants to mention specific bills by standard House and Senate 
bill numbers. For the most part, bill numbers were used to identify legislation only when they were used 
colloquially by lawmakers, staff, lobbyists, and journalists. Otherwise, common titles or acronyms were 
used more frequently, or registrants simply described bills as “transportation funding” or “DoD reauthor-
ization.” The House Clerk began strongly urging filers to use bill numbers over time. No formal change 
to official guidance was made, but we do observe a dramatic rise in the number of bill number mentions 
beginning in 2006, before HLOGA passed.

261
The lobbying disclosure act at 25: Challenges and opportunities…
format makes it impossible to answer these questions since expenditures are not 
itemized by lobbyist or issue.
Therefore, information nested within each report may be redundant. That is, a 
single quarterly report may indicate that the same lobbyist lobbied on the same bill 
in two different issue areas. This is, of course, artificial. When an actual lobbyist 
asks an actual Senator to vote for or against an actual bill, they do not ask twice in 
the same breath.
Complex lobbying disclosure reporting practices
To complicate matters further, the LDA requires entities to register and file under 
three separate conditions. First, if a registrant spends more than $5000 per quar -
ter on lobbying, they report their aggregate expenditures (including money spent 
on lobbying firm consulting contracts) and all of their internal activities as if they 
are their own client. Typically, the organization filing under this condition has an 
office and full-time employees physically located in the Washington, DC metropoli-
tan area. Second, if a consulting firm earns more than $5000 per quarter from a 
single client, they must report the activities on behalf of the client. The most com-
mon arrangement is a Washington lobbying or law firm that has multiple clients; 
they file separate LD-2 reports for each client in each reporting period. The third 
and least common practice is when a consulting firm exclusively engages in lobby -
ing activity on behalf of a client, and the client organization does not engage in any 
in-house “lobbying activities” other than entering into the agreement with the firm. 
Since entering into a contract is itself a de minimis “lobbying activity,” the organi-
zation does not file its own LD-2. So, for organizations filing exclusively under the 
third condition, their contract firms’ lobbying income equals their total expenditures, 
which are not actually ever reported.
The original LD-2 forms, however, do not indicate under which conditions it is 
being filed. Fortunately, OpenSecrets.org deduces it when it cleans and codes the 
raw data, though users need to know how to query the bulk data to not (a) double-
count a firm’s income from a client as an expenditure or (b) genuinely count a firm’s 
income as the client’s only expenditures, as in the third condition.
The most common practice is for a single client organization and one or more 
of its consulting lobbying firms to file under the first and second conditions. While 
this method makes it easier to calculate overall expenditures, doing so necessarily 
reports redundant lobbying activity information. In other words, when information 
from a single client’s many LD-2 s is aggregated to the organization level, it may 
actually make perfect sense to double-count lobbying activities even after taking 
careful steps to avoid double-counting lobbying expenditures. In Fig.  1, we show 
how subordinate data has a one-to-many relationship with a client across multiple 
reports filed on its behalf.
This diagram shows the nested and duplicative structure of information reported 
by hypothetical Organization O both as a self-filing registrant (top) and as a cli-
ent of a second registrant (bottom), Lobbying Firm L. The organization reports its 
total expenditures on both its in-house expenses (e.g., overhead, compensation for 

262 T. M. LaPira, H. F . Thomas 
government affairs employees, travel and accommodations for visits to the Capitol, 
etc.) and its payments to consultants, in this case only one firm L. Organization O 
reports lobbying in three issue areas, employing five in-house lobbyists, advocating 
six specific issues, and contacting five agencies.
Lobbying firm L deployed four of its employees as additional contract lobbyists 
on Organization O’s behalf. Three of these lobbyists were also active in two issue 
areas that O’s in-house lobbyists were (Issue Areas 1 and 3), and three lobbyists 
were active on a completely new one, Issue Area 4. These contract lobbyists also 
lobbied on three specific issues not advocated by any of O’s in-house lobbyists. Not 
only is this hypothetical case complex, it also reveals redundant information, such 
as the fact that Specific Issue 4 was reported under two issue areas by in-house lob-
byists and a third issue area by contract lobbyists. Redundant information like this 
can be used to understand the relative salience of particular specific issues. Specific 
Issue 4 is probably relatively more important to O than Specific Issue 9, which is 
mentioned only once across all six issue area reports.
These kinds of arrangements are not at all unusual, since some lobbyists special-
ize in substantive policy or in the relationships they have with particular lawmak -
ers or agencies. At the same time, this particular hypothetical is much simpler than 
actual reports where a client uses dozens of lobbyists to engage in multiple activi-
ties. Moreover, multiply these complexities by the fact that all of these reports are 
filed semiannually (between 1996 and 2007) or quarterly (2008 to present) by tens 
of thousands of organizations lobbying at any given time.
With this complexity come great opportunities for creative measurement and 
identification strategies, since collectively the data allow for the construction of 
pooled time series, unbalanced panels, or relational networks now covering more 
than two decades of lobbying. Yet, the data themselves are characterized by several 
artificial characteristics, some of which can be traced to the 2007 HLOGA and other 
unclear or undocumented causes. In other words, there are disturbances in trends 
over time that have nothing to do with any theory about interest group politics, but 
need to be considered nonetheless.
Annualized trends in LDA reporting, 1998–2018
The CRP lobbying database contains 1000,336 verified LD-2 lobbying disclosure 
reports filed between 1998 and 2018.
7 Within these reports, a total of 47,555 unique 
organizations report lobbying activity at least once during the 21-year observa-
tion window.
8 Table  1 reports the ten most frequently occurring clients over time, 
7 2018 was the most recent full reporting year at the time of writing. Note that CRP identifies the 
most recent report where amendments replace previously filed reports. We exclude reports replaced by 
amended filings. .
8 CRP resolves organizational acquisitions, mergers, and rebrandings at the two-year federal election 
cycle level. That is, if Corporation X and Corporation Y merge to become Organization Z in 2016, lob-
bying and campaign finance reports for both X and Y are artificially attributed Z in 2015, even though it 
may not have existed.

263
The lobbying disclosure act at 25: Challenges and opportunities…
aggregating both semiannual and quarterly reports since 1998. PhRMA (2189), 
Verizon (1869), and Lockheed Martin (1,1852) report most often, suggesting they 
retained a large number of consulting firms, hired a large number of lobbyists, and 
advocated in many issue areas. These data are highly skewed (Drutman et al. 2019), 
with a mean of 21.03 and median of 7 reports per client. If a client were to employ 
one in-house lobbyist or only one contract firm for 64 possible reporting periods 
(10 semiannual periods and 44 quarterly periods), they would occur 64 times at this 
level of analysis. In the case of PhRMA, the organization’s 2189 reports include 64 
periods of in-house lobbying, 64 periods of reports under contract with the major 
law firm Covington & Burling, and 2056 reports filed by 156 additional firms.
To address the nested and complex structure of the reports, data are typically 
reshaped at different levels of analysis by joining select data files available separately 
from the OpenSecrets.org.
9 Figure  2 plots the number of reports filed over time as 
well as the number of unique clients, total spending, and multi-client contract lobby-
ing firms that register as agents of their clients. Since forms were filed semiannually 
prior to 2007 and quarterly from 2008 onward, we aggregate all reports within each 
year. Doing so is also consistent with common practice in lobbying consulting con-
tracts, which are typically written to match the calendar year time frame and rarely, 
if ever, span across Congresses.
In the first year of the series, 19,882 lobbying disclosure reports were filed. This 
number increased steadily to a peak of 38,739 in 2007, and nearly doubled in 2008. 
Table 1  Client Reports, 
1998–2018
LDA reports includes both semiannual and quarterly reports since 
1998
Client Reports
Pharmaceutical Research & Manufacturers of 
America
2189
Verizon Communications 1869
Lockheed Martin 1852
Comcast Corp 1726
Amgen Inc 1531
AT&T Inc 1484
General Dynamics 1413
Microsoft Corp 1324
Edison Electric Institute 1230
Boeing Co 1143
Overall N 47,555
Overall Mean (s.d.)/Median 21.0 (49.82)/7.0
9 CRP bulk lobbying files are divided into various “tables,” each with their own data dictionary. Our 
analyses join these tables by the relevant unit of analysis. Typically, the table “lob_lobbying” is the pri-
mary object that contains one row per lobbying report. It can be joined to other tables to construct a 
dataset containing nested information such as issue areas (“lob_issue”), lobbyists (“lob_lobbyist”), and 
agencies (“lob_agency”) as needed.

264 T. M. LaPira, H. F . Thomas 
While it appears that lobbying grew dramatically from 2007 to 2008, this shift is 
a consequence of increased disclosure frequency, not increased lobbying activity. 
Since the high of 79,203 in 2008, the number of reports filed decrease rapidly, rang-
ing between 62,000 and 58,000 from 2012-2018. These declines are attributed to 
more conservative LDA compliance stemming from increased HLOGA reporting 
requirements and increased journalistic and academic scrutiny of the reports (LaPira 
2016; Thomas and LaPira 2017; LaPira and Thomas 2017).
The other measures shown in Fig.  2—clients, firms, and total spending (adjusted 
for inflation)—are independent of increases in the volume due to quarterly filings. 
Each series exhibits a similar trend: steady increases between 1998 and 2009, a high 
in 2009, and a rapid decline through 2012. They then hold flat from 2012 to 2017 
with slight increases in 2018.
Aggregating all reports to the client level yields the mean number of lobbyists, 
agencies mentioned, issue areas, and specific issues listed on lobbying disclosure 
forms over time.
10 Given the LD-2 report-level structure of the lobbying data, there 
are two methods by which researchers can count nested information. The first is 
to aggregate across reports filed each year, which produces counts that measure 
repeated and non-exclusive occurrences of lobbyists, agencies, and other measures. 
The second method is to tabulate unique occurrences of each value across clients.
This latter approach compensates for measurement error caused by the sharp 
increase in reporting frequency between 2007 and 2008, but does ignore poten-
tially useful information on the volume of event counts of issue mentions, lob-
byist mentions, and so on. For example, if a client’s reports in a given year 
Fig. 2  Trends in LDA Reports, 
1998–2008. Note: Counts are of 
non-missing observations for the 
1998–2018 time span. Data are 
aggregated at the yearly level 
across semiannual (≤ 2007) 
and quarterly (> 2007) LDA 
reports. Clients and firms are 
calculated as the unique number 
of each occurring in a given 
year. Spending is USD adjusted 
to 2018 dollars for inflation 
using the Consumer Price Index 
(CPI-U-RS, US Census), in 
billions across reports filed in a 
given year
10 We do this by separately joining the “lob_lobbying” table to each table with subordinate information 
(e.g., “lob_lobbyist”) and tabulating aggregated counts and means by client across each year.

265
The lobbying disclosure act at 25: Challenges and opportunities…
mentioned the Federal Aviation Administration as a targeted “agency” on eight 
quarterly forms in 2018 (four filed by the client disclosing in-house lobbying and 
four filed by one contract lobbying firm), the first method would result in a count 
of eight FAA agency-mentioned events and the second would result in one count 
of the organization contacting the FAA.
Fig. 3  a Trends in Nested Information by Clients (Means of Aggregated Observations), 1998–2008. 
Note: Measures are calculated as aggregated means across clients active in a given year. Lobbyists, 
agencies, issues, and specific issues may be repeated across reports for a given client. Agencies includes 
mentions of either chamber of the US Congress. b Trends in Nested Information by Clients (Means of 
Unique Observations), 1998–2008. Note: Measures are calculated as means across clients active in a 
given year. Measures are tabulated as unique mentions of individual lobbyists, agencies, issues, and spe-
cific issues. Agencies includes mentions of either chamber of the US Congress

266 T. M. LaPira, H. F . Thomas 
We plot the mean number of lobbyists, agencies, issue areas, and specific issues 
using both methods in Fig.  3a, b. Figure  3 shows that each series exhibits a similar 
pattern: largely flat counts prior to HLOGA, a sharp increase in 2008 followed by 
an immediate decline, and a slowly increasing trend through 2018. This artificial 
increase illustrates how HLOGA presents significant issues for time series and panel 
analyses, despite the growing number of years of available data. If the research ques-
tion demands aggregating data at the report level, then we recommend separating 
pre- and post-HLOGA reports into two separate, non-parallel series.
In Fig.  3b, the count of lobbyist, agency, issue area, and specific issue events pre-
sent undisrupted trends. The first three series are subject to fluctuation between 1998 
and 2003 unrelated to changes to the law several years after. The trends stabilize and 
the series diverge from 2003 to 2018. The number of lobbyists per client increases 
slightly through 2007, declines until 2010 and holds at roundly 4 through 2018. The 
number of agencies oscillates between 3.6 in 2005 to 2004 through the end of the 
series.
Aggregated across all reports, the US House and Senate account for 29.6% and 
29.4% of the nearly 3 million mentions of agencies, with 250 other government 
offices and departments listed. When tabulated as unique occurrences across clients, 
the US House and Senate each account for an identical 18.37% of 230,300 observa-
tions, suggesting a distinction without a difference.
The number of issue areas shown in Fig.  3b increases steadily from a low of 2.3 
in 2004 up to 3 in 2018. This increase may in part be the result of additional issue 
areas available to filers to categorize their activity—up from 72 to 80 since 1998. 
Across the full time period, the issues of Federal Budget & Appropriations, Taxes, 
Health Issues, Defense, and Transportation account for roughly a third of all issue 
area activity.
Unique mentions of specific issues increase steadily over time. Over 800,000 spe-
cific issues are listed in LDA reports since 1998. They range from general descrip-
tions of activity such as “monitor trade legislation,” “copyright reform,” or “appro-
priations” to highly specific and enumerated lists of bill names and numbers, and 
even specific perfecting amendments or subordinate policies contained in proposed 
legislation. Though CRP does parse bill numbers and names from these specific 
issue fields beginning in 2005, researchers should be extremely cautious in their use. 
Given the lack of unique bill id numbers that span Congressional sessions, and var -
ied detail in disclosure in the specific issue field, the potential for measurement error 
in terms of matching listed bills to bill content is high.
11
11 Dusso (2010), Grossmann and Pyle (2013), LaPira and Thomas (2017), Brasher and Britt (2014), and 
You (2017) analyze bill mentions from CRP data, but indicate significant manual data cleaning effort to 
minimize obvious sources of measurement error.

267
The lobbying disclosure act at 25: Challenges and opportunities…
The scholarly use of LDA data
Interest group scholars have made good use of LDA data in the quarter century 
they have been available. Yet we argue that the interest group scholarly community 
has, ironically, suffered from a collective action failure to exploit the data to its full 
potential. Here, we identify 85 peer-reviewed articles, chapters, and books that rely 
on LDA data in a variety of ways to uncover two general patterns.
First, research that uses only LDA data tends to focus on selected cases—typi-
cally major corporations in the Fortune 500 or 1000, specific organizations like the 
National Rifle Association, or particular policy issues such as taxes or the environ-
ment. This work offers insight into interest group behavior, but inherent biases from 
selection on cases or observables make these insights difficult to generalize across 
the full population. Second, research designed to be more generalizable tends to join 
LDA data with information from other large data sources. This kind of work lends 
itself to generalizability, but scholars tend to create single-use connections to sec-
ondary data sources to test specific hypotheses. These synthetic “LDA + other” data-
sets are useful in isolation and for replication, but there is little effort to pool them 
together as a common good resource. That is, despite the enormously rich LDA data, 
scholars continue to reinvent the wheel to put the data to good—albeit one-time use.
Analysis of LDA research
We conducted a comprehensive search to identify research using LDA data. We ini-
tially search library catalogs and public sources like Google Scholar. We then add 
sources based on our familiarity with the literature and extensive literature reviews 
(de Figueiredo and Brian 2014; Hojnacki et  al. 2012), searching major academic 
presses and journals, and browsing every issue of Interest Groups & Advocacy 
journal.
12
We report the coverage (in years) of lobbying data used, the unit(s) of analysis, 
the authors’ sampling process, and the scope of data use, and any datasets that are 
merged with LDA data in Table  2. In terms of coverage, 17 studies (20%) leverage 
only one year of data and the overwhelming majority use multiple years. For those 
spanning multiple years, it is common for researchers to match coverage to selection 
needs (e.g., the years in which a linked dataset is observed). On average, the studies 
in our analysis span 6.7 years of LDA data (s.d. = 5.4). The median start year is 1999 
and the median end year is 2008.
Units of analyses vary quite a bit. We find that 51 (60.0%) of studies use the client 
level of analysis. Another 16 (18.8%) use the lobbyist, focusing on revenue, parti-
sanship, or revolving door status. Three studies examine lobbying activity by clients 
aggregated to the level the economic industry.
13 Another four studies (4.7%) analyze 
12 See the Online appendix for more detail on the search process, coding scheme, and a comprehensive 
list of research works.
13 Researchers studying industry-level activity typically focus on business clients and used linked data-
sets to aggregate to NAICS industries. CRP also adds a hierarchical industry classification to client-level 

268 T. M. LaPira, H. F . Thomas 
the data at the issue area level, three at the bill level (3.5%), and one (1.2%) at the 
level of lobbying firms. Others simultaneously draw on multiple levels (e.g., lobby -
ists and lobbying firms), or link lobbying activity to a study of another unit of analy-
sis (e.g., policy domains or agency rules).
Scholars merge a wide range of outside data sources with lobbying disclosure 
data. The most common was the corporate financial information (e.g., revenue) 
drawn from Compustat or S&P Corporate IQ with 13 (15.3%). Nearly all studies 
of businesses as lobbying clients draw on these data sources for important covari-
ates. Five studies (5.9%) compared lobbying activity to campaign finance activity 
or linked individual lobbyists with specific donations, commonly drawn from CRP 
either at the organization or lobbyist level of analysis.
The various datasets published by the Policy Agendas Project (Baumgartner, 
Jones, and Wilkerson 2002; Jones and Baumgartner 2005) are linked to LDA data 
in four instances (4.7%).
14 These include information on Gallup’s Most Important 
Table 2  Analysis of research 
using LDA data Coverage
Mean Years (s.d.) 6.7 (5.4)
Unit of Analysis
Client 51 (60.0%)
Lobbyist 16 (18.8%)
Industry 3 (3.5%)
Issue Area 4 (4.7%)
Bill 3 (3.5%)
Lobbying Firm 1 (1.2%)
Multiple 4 (4.7%)
Other 3 (3.5%)
Links to datasets
Compustat or Other Financial 13 (15.3%)
CRP Campaign Finance/PAC Contributions 5 (5.9%)
Policy Agendas Project 4 (4.7%)
Lobbyists.info/Washington Reps. 3 (3.5%)
Other 34 (40.0%)
Scope of Inquiry
Full population 17 (20.0%)
Random sample 12 (14.1%)
Selection 42 (49.4%)
Single case 6 (7.1%)
N 85
Footnote 13 (continued)
data, though this schema is not easily converted into the popular NAICS categories (see https ://www.
opens ecret s.org/feder al-lobby ing/indus tries ?cycle  = a).
14 See https ://www.compa rativ eagen das.net/us.

269
The lobbying disclosure act at 25: Challenges and opportunities…
Problem dataset or measures of government attention in the form of Congressional 
hearings. Three studies (3.5%) use information from Washington Representatives. 
An additional 34 (40%) studies merge LDA data to other datasets that range from 
interest group scorecards of Members of Congress, Maplight bill position informa-
tion, characteristics of US cities, and US state-level lobbying activity.
The scope of analyses is also highly varied. Twelve studies (14.1%) draw ran-
dom samples of clients, lobbyists, or issue areas, while 17 (20.0%) analyze the full 
population of clients, lobbyists, or issues in a given time frame. Nearly half of the 
85 studies (42, 49.4%) limit their scope to a selection driven by the research ques-
tion. Selections span clients meeting certain criteria—such as companies listed in 
the S&P 500, midsize American cities, certain institutions of higher education, or 
electric utilities. The remaining 6 (7.1%) focus on single cases such as the lobbying 
of one client or lobbying surrounding high-profile legislation like Dodd-Frank or the 
Affordable Care Act.
Selecting cases may be advantageous for given questions or may be necessary for 
feasibility, though generally scholars fail to recognize their selection biases. More 
importantly, creating datasets on selections like these generates a tragedy of the 
commons. For example, there exists no common, easily accessible, and comprehen-
sive crosswalk between the LDA and Compustat even though 15% of the studies 
merge these data sources.
15 Similarly, any new study of lobbying clients must gener-
ate supplemental information (e.g., group type) independently, despite these meas-
ures being routinely collected among scholars of organized interests.
The future of LDA data
The longitudinal and cross-sectional depth of the LDA data is underused. This 
may be due to the complex, nested structure of the data and the high start-up costs 
involved in merging lobbying information with other sources of data. To aid in this 
effort, we make available a number of tables drawn the CRP lobbying database.
16 
Most importantly, we generate up-to-date datasets at a variety of levels of analy -
sis that aggregate the nested information across the entire CRP observation period 
(1998-2018), and plan to do so for each subsequent quarterly reporting period.
17 The 
population of clients, lobbying firms, lobbyists, and issue areas presents new oppor-
tunities for generalizable findings about lobbying behavior beyond purposive or con-
venience samples.
Our analysis of the 85 articles and books that leverage LDA data also suggests 
the need for a new “data commons” to support the study of organized interests. We 
15 Note that the LobbyView project makes great strides in this direction (see https ://www.lobby view.
org/#!/), though the data are available only in small quantities through a programming interface.
16 Available at author website. The replication data would be in addition to CRP data, recompiled and 
reshaped as we do in this article.
17 We also make available for replication the code and longitudinal dataset compiled to produce Figs.  2 
and 3 above at author website.

270 T. M. LaPira, H. F . Thomas 
suggest that significant analytical progress could be made through centralizing cli-
ent-level information in a single location, organized with identifiers for organiza-
tions, lobbying firms, lobbyists, and bills per Congress. The lobbying data commons 
would allow users merge relevant datasets to meet their needs, thus avoiding the 
need to duplicate efforts with each new study.
As the LDA turns 25, we look forward to reflecting on the database at 50. Ulti-
mately, we aspire to go beyond relying simply on a lobbying disclosure data com-
mons, but rather a universal sampling frame of all organizations engaged in Ameri-
can politics. We acknowledge that the lobbying disclosure database itself is a narrow 
selection of groups that engage in some form of advocacy at the US national level 
only. Most organizations that seek to influence legislation, regulations, or legal inter-
pretations probably do not report those activities if they do not trigger LDA’s narrow 
reporting requirements (Thomas and LaPira 2017), yet researchers have compiled 
extensive information on organizations active in other venues (e.g., submission of 
amicus curiae briefs, Box-Steffensmeier and Christenson 2014). Achieving this goal 
would be an enormous challenge, but would create new and exciting opportunities 
for the scholarly community to learn more about how well-organized interests influ-
ence who gets what, when, and how.
Compliance with ethical standards 
Conflict of interest On behalf of all authors, the corresponding author states that there is no conflict of 
interest.
References
Baumgartner, Frank R., Bryan D. Jones, and John D. Wilkerson. 2002. Studying Policy Dynamics. In 
Policy Dynamics, edited by Frank R Baumgartner and Bryan D Jones, First. University of Chicago 
Press.
Baumgartner, Frank R., and Beth L. Leech. 1998. Basic Interests: The Importance of Groups in Politics 
and in Political Science. Princeton: Princeton University Press.
Baumgartner, Frank R., and Beth L. Leech. 1999. Studying Interest Groups Using Lobbying Disclosure 
Reports. Vox Pop 17 (3): 1–3.
Baumgartner, Frank R., and Beth L. Leech. 2001. Issue Niches and Policy Bandwagons: Patterns of Inter-
est Group Involvement in National Politics. Journal of Politics 63: 1191–1213.
Box-Steffensmeier, Janet M., and Dino P. Christenson. 2014. The Evolution and Formation of Amicus 
Curiae Networks. Social Networks 36: 82–96.
Brasher, Holly, and Jason Britt. 2014. Understanding the Influence of Lobbying in the U.S. Congress: 
Preferences, Networks, Money, and Bills. In New Directions in Interest Group Politics, edited by 
Matt Grossmann, 185–203. New York: Routledge.
Clemens, Austin C. 2014. All Politics Is Local, but Lobbying Is Federal and Local: The Validity of LDA 
Data. Business and Politics 16 (2): 267–289.
Drutman, Lee, Matt Grossmann, and Timothy LaPira. 2019. The Interest Group Top Tier. In Can Amer-
ica Govern Itself? ed. Frances E. Lee, and Nolan McCarty, 45–68. New York: Cambridge Univer -
sity Press.
Dusso, Aaron. 2010. Legislation, Political Context, and Interest Group Behavior. Political Research 
Quarterly 63: 55–67.
de Figueiredo, John M., and K.Richter. Brian. 2014. Advancing the Empirical Research on Lobbying. 
Annual Review of Political Science 17: 163–185.

271
The lobbying disclosure act at 25: Challenges and opportunities…
Gray, Virginia, and David Lowery. 1996. The Population Ecology of Interest Representation. Ann Arbor: 
University of Michigan Press.
Grossmann, Matt, and Kurt Pyle. 2013. Lobbying and Congressional Bill Advancement. Interest Groups 
& Advocacy 2 (1): 91–111.
Heinz, John P., Edward O. Laumann, Robert L. Nelson, and Robert H. Salisbury. 1993. The Hollow Core: 
Private Interests in National Policymaking. Cambridge: Harvard University Press.
Hojnacki, Marie, David C. Kimball, Frank R. Baumgartner, Jeffrey M. Berry, and Beth L. Leech. 2012. 
Studying Organizational Advocacy and Influence: Reexamining Interest Group Research. Annual 
Review of Political Science 15: 379–399.
Jones, Bryan D., and Frank R. Baumgartner. 2005. The Politics of Attention: How Government Prioritizes 
Problems. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Koger, Gregory, and Jennifer Nicoll Victor. 2009. Polarized Agents: Campaign Contributions by Lobby -
ists. PS: Political Science and Politics 42 (3): 485–88.
LaPira, Timothy M. 2016. Lobbying in the Shadows: How Private Interests Hide From Public Scrutiny 
and Why That Matters. In Interest Group Politics, edited by Allan J. Cigler and Burdett A. Loomis, 
9th ed., 224–48. Washington: CQ Press.
LaPira, Timothy M., and Herschel F. Thomas. 2014. The Revolving Door and Interest Representation. 
Interest Groups and Advocacy 3 (1): 1–26.
LaPira, Timothy M., and Herschel F. Thomas. 2017. Revolving Door Lobbying: Public Service, Private 
Influence, and the Unequal Representation of Interests. Lawrence: University Press of Kansas.
LaPira, Timothy M., Herschel F. Thomas, and Frank R. Baumgartner. 2014. The Two Worlds of Lob-
bying: Washington Lobbyists in the Core and on the Periphery. Interest Groups and Advocacy 3: 
219–224.
McKay, Amy. 2018. What Do Campaign Contributions Buy? Lobbyists’ Strategic Giving. Interest 
Groups and Advocacy 7 (1): 1–18.
Schlozman, Kay L. 1984. What Accent the Heavenly Chorus? Political Equality and the American Pres-
sure System. The Journal of Politics 46: 1006–1032.
Schlozman, Kay Lehman, and John T. Tierney. 1983. More of the Same: Washington Pressure Group 
Activity in a Decade of Change. Journal of Politics 45: 351–377.
Schlozman, Kay Lehman, and John T. Tierney. 1986. Organized Interests and American Democracy. 
New York: Harper and Row.
Thomas, Herschel F., and Timothy M. LaPira. 2017. How Many Lobbyists Are in Washington?: Shadow 
Lobbying and the Gray Market for Policy Advocacy. Interest Groups and Advocacy 6 (3): 199–214.
Victor, Jennifer Nicoll, and Gregory Koger. 2016. Financing Friends: How Lobbyists Create a Web of 
Relationships among Members of Congress. Interest Groups and Advocacy 5 (3): 224–262.
Walker, Jack L. 1983. The Origins and Maintenance of Interest Groups in America. American Political 
Science Review 77: 390–406.
You, Hye Young. 2017. Ex Post Lobbying. The Journal of Politics 79 (4): 1162–1176.
Publisher’s Note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published 
maps and institutional affiliations.