Revolving door lobbyists and interest
representation

Timothy M. LaPiraa,* and Herschel F. Thomas IIIb
a
Department of Political Science, James Madison University, MSC, 7705, Harrisonburg, VA 22807, USA.
b
Department of Government, University of Texas at Austin, Mail Code A1800, Austin, TX 78712, USA.
*Corresponding author.




Abstract Although experience inside the halls of power afford lobbyists valuable
political, policy and procedural skills that can improve the deliberative process, it also
gives them privileged access to former employers that others do not have. Washington’s
revolving door evokes legitimate ethical concerns, such as when former legislators
resign their seats to take lucrative jobs representing the very industries they regulate.
However, social scientists know surprisingly little about the revolving door beyond
such sensational, albeit important, cases. To shed more light on the broader phenom-
enon, we systematically explore the revolving door on a large scale to answer a simple
question: Do revolving door lobbyists represent different interests than conventional
lobbyists? If, as revolving door proponents imply, these lobbyists work on behalf of
organized interests solely for their specialized subject-matter expertise, then we
would expect them to represent clienteles that are no different than conventional
lobbyists. Alternatively, if they represent a wider variety of economic interests than
conventional lobbyists then we assume they are hired more for their ability to get a foot
in the door than to serve as policy expert adjuncts to government. Using evi-
dence from original data on the professional biographies of roughly 1600 registered
lobbyists – which we link to data from almost 50 000 quarterly Lobbying Disclosure
Act reports – we expose a signiﬁcant transparency loophole in the law. Because
lobbyists are not required to continuously disclose their ‘covered ofﬁcial’ status – the
statutory deﬁnition of revolving door – periodic lobbying disclosure reports effectively
hide the revolving door from public scrutiny. Instead, we rely on our more comprehen-
sive information on lobbyists’ connections to previous employers to more accurately
measure the size and scope of Washington’s revolving door, and to investigate how
these connections affect which interests they represent. We ﬁnd that revolving door
lobbyists have worked mostly in Congress, tend to work as contract lobbyists rather
than in-house government-relations staff and are more likely to specialize in lobbying
for appropriations earmarks. Then, after controlling for a variety of lobbying speciali-
zations, we show that former members of Congress are no more likely than other lob-
byists to attract a more economically diverse set of clients than their conventional-
lobbyist counterparts. However, congressional staffers who had worked their way up

             © 2014 Macmillan Publishers Ltd. 2047-7414 Interest Groups & Advocacy   1–26
                                     www.palgrave-journals.com/iga/
      LaPira and Thomas



the organizational ladder on Capitol Hill do. We infer that well-connected congressional
staffers who spin through the revolving door sell access to key decision makers in
Congress, not their industry- or issue-speciﬁc technical or substantive expertise. Sim-
ply, the revolving door problem is not limited to a handful of headline-catching former
legislators, is much bigger than the existing lobbying disclosure regime reveals and –
most importantly – signiﬁcantly distorts the representation of interests before govern-
ment. The practical implications are clear: lobbying transparency rules, cooling-off
periods and other restrictions are insufﬁcient disincentives. Interest group demand for
access is simply too strong. We advocate enhancing lobbying transparency by expand-
ing the statutory deﬁnitions of lobbying activities, requiring lobbyists to disclose more
details about government employment and shifting some of the disclosure burden to
democratically accountable government ofﬁcials themselves.
Interest Groups & Advocacy advance online publication, 21 January 2014;
doi:10.1057/iga.2013.16

Keywords: interest groups; lobbying; revolving door; Lobbying Disclosure Act;
Congress; congressional staff




The so-called revolving door between government and the lobbying profession pre-
sents a conundrum in American politics: lobbyists play a critical and legitimate role
in the policy process, yet the advantages that come with having worked inside the
halls of power gives the interests they represent undue inﬂuence.
   There are two competing normative views of revolving door lobbying. Interest
groups supply important information and subject-matter expertise to government so
that it can do its job (Bauer et al, 1963; Esterling, 2004; Hall and Deardorff, 2006).
Interest groups are normatively justiﬁed if citizens are equally represented and their
interests are faithfully communicated in a way that minimizes rent-seeking and
maximizes deliberation (Mansbridge, 1992). Consequently – defenders of the
revolving door point out – lobbyists with valuable policy subject-matter expertise
that comes with government experience are better suited to supply the information
that policymakers need to make well-reasoned decisions.
   Critics respond that it is not so much the policy expertise, but rather lobbyists’
personal connections and insider knowledge that make them valuable. When
organized interests are heard solely because they hire those with the right connections
– not because they have the best ideas – the democratic process suffers. Having the
right person return your call or understanding how things really get done is not the
normative equivalent to supplying critical information subsidies.
   Moreover, pundits and watchdogs condemn the revolving door because they see
lobbyists lining their own pockets in pursuit of particularized beneﬁts rather than
enhancing the quality of policy debates. Legal scholar Larry Lessig goes so far as to
declare revolving door lobbying to be evidence of an institutionally corrupt gift

2            © 2014 Macmillan Publishers Ltd. 2047-7414   Interest Groups & Advocacy   1–26
                                                   Revolving door lobbyists and interest representation



economy, where a policy favor granted today is presumed to be rewarded with a
lucrative job on K Street tomorrow (2011). This theme is familiar, as in a recent
Washington Post editorial: ‘Gone … are the days when members of Congress
scrupled to become lobbyists upon their departure from ofﬁce. Now, representatives
and senators spin like dervishes through the revolving door’ (Washington Post
Editorial Board, 2012).
   For example, critics point to Representative Jo Ann Emerson (R-MO) – a member
of the congressional subcommittee responsible for funding rural development
projects – who shocked her colleagues just 9 days after decisively winning reelection
to a tenth term by announcing that she was becoming CEO of the National Rural
Electric Cooperative Association. Presumably, detractors claim, Emerson did not
believe that she could do much about rural development as a mere Congresswoman
on the Appropriations Committee, though a seven-ﬁgure salary may have nudged her
through the revolving door.
   There is little doubt that elected ofﬁcials and their professional employees have
incentives to parlay their public service into private gain in the political inﬂuence
industry. Though such denunciations are often general and speculative, an important
normative concern underscores them: revolving door lobbyists have the experience
inside the halls of government and the privileged access to those in power that other
lobbyists – let alone the typical citizen – can never obtain. What is missing, though, is
sound empirical evidence about how widespread the practice is, and how it affects
interest representation in Washington. Social scientists know surprisingly little about
the revolving door beyond sensational, albeit important, cases like Emerson’s.
   Still, questions about the revolving door have long fascinated political scientists
concerned about interest group inﬂuence. At least since Herring’s (1929) account of
lawyers and lobbyists in Washington, scholars have speculated how government
experience and professional connections supply access and inﬂuence on Capitol Hill
and within the executive branch. Later, Bauer et al (1963), Milbrath (1963), Deakin
(1966) and Zeigler and Baer (1969) describe the movement of government bureau-
crats into the lobbying profession in a handful of policy domains.
   The picture painted by these early observers was one of the efﬁcient information
sharing between government bureaucrats and the lobbyists with whom they work so
closely. These qualitative accounts illuminated the relationships between government
personnel and lobbyists, but they did not reveal how common the revolving door was
or uncover how, or even if, it affected the policy process. Gormley (1979) was the
ﬁrst to explicitly test the ‘revolving door hypothesis’, though in the reverse direction.
His study of the Federal Communications Commission demonstrates that commis-
sioners who had once worked in the broadcast industry are more likely to side with
that industry’s positions on proposed regulations. This work inspired additional tests
of the revolving door hypothesis in a variety of government venues (Quirk, 1981;
McGuire, 2000), over time (Cohen, 1986), in selected policy domains (Salisbury
et al, 1989; Hansen, 1991; Lazarus and McKay, 2012; Citizens for Responsibility
            © 2014 Macmillan Publishers Ltd. 2047-7414   Interest Groups & Advocacy      1–26             3
      LaPira and Thomas



and Ethics in Washington, 2012) and for selected lobbyists and ﬁrms (Revolving
Door Working Group, 2005; Public Citizen, 2005). As with much work on interest
group politics (Baumgartner and Leech, 1998), most revolving door studies suffer
from case selection bias, as they typically focus only on one or a few government
institutions or policy areas.
   A handful of studies more explicitly examine revolving door lobbying on a
broader scale. Heinz et al (1993) interviewed nearly 800 lobbyists and policy
advocates about their lobbying careers, and asked them about their previous
government jobs. Roughly 70 per cent indicated that their government employment
contributed to increased issue familiarity, and 89 per cent reported that their
experience provided a helpful knowledge of the decision making process. Lobbyists
self-report that working in government gave them both procedural knowledge and
subject-matter expertise, but they do not mention access to former colleagues per se.
The authors appear sanguine about the revolving door, concluding that journalistic
accounts of abuse are ‘horror stories’ at best.
   Baumgartner et al (2009) reach a different conclusion about the impact of the
revolving door in their study of lobbying across a random sample of 98 issues. Of the
many resources that advocates have at their disposal, hiring ‘covered ofﬁcial’
lobbyists – those included in the Lobbying Disclosure Act’s (LDA) statutory
requirement that registered lobbyists report any federal government employment in
the preceding 20 years – is the only independent variable other than having powerful
government ofﬁcials champion a lobbying campaign’s cause from the inside that
systematically predicts lobbying success (Baumgartner et al, 2009, p. 208). Having
greater aggregated material resources such as campaign donations, lobbying
expenditures, corporate ﬁnancial resources or organizational size is not associated
with successful policy outcomes. But having a greater number of well-connected
lobbyists on your side can be decisive.
   Recently, there has been renewed attention to the revolving door, with several
research projects designed explicitly to study its effects on lobbying and political
inﬂuence. Lazarus and McKay (2012) link lobbying disclosures to education fund-
ing data and ﬁnd that universities increase the likelihood of receiving earmarked
federal funds when they hire revolving door lobbyists. Blanes i Vidal et al (2012)
match the names of registered lobbyists with congressional payroll records and
ﬁnd that those who previously worked for sitting members of Congress earn
more than lobbyists who did not. Moreover, their income drops immediately after
their former congressional employers leave ofﬁce. Using a similar design with
slightly different data, Bertrand et al (2011) ﬁnd that lobbyists tend to switch the
issues on which they are active when their previous congressional employer moves
from one committee to another. In addition, Eggers and Hainmueller (2009) and
González-Bailon et al (2013) track private-sector employment of former govern-
ment ofﬁcials in the United Kingdom, though this work does not explicitly address
lobbying.
4            © 2014 Macmillan Publishers Ltd. 2047-7414   Interest Groups & Advocacy   1–26
                                                   Revolving door lobbyists and interest representation



   Government ofﬁcials gain from having former employees as lobbyists as well,
which may not be surprising given former Republican Whip Tom DeLay’s well-
publicized attempt to ﬁll lobbying positions with fellow partisans in the K Street
Project (Loomis, 2007). Eggers (2010) ﬁnds evidence of a partisan revolving
door beyond this episode; lobbyists with afﬁliations to the party in power take on
more clients. Taken together, a growing literature convincingly supports the view
that lobbyists’ prior employment connections to members of Congress are more
important than their issue expertise.
   These large-scale empirical studies offer important insight into revolving door
lobbyists’ value and behavior. Yet they adopt problematic or incomplete measures of
the revolving door. While Baumgartner et al (2009) rely solely on LDA self-reports,
critics of the LDA have long pointed out its weaknesses (Fried et al, 2011).
Puzzlingly, lobbyists are only required to report their covered ofﬁcial status one time
for each client, either on the initial registration form ﬁled on behalf of a client or on
the ﬁrst quarterly report on which she or he is listed as an active lobbyist on behalf of
that client (Clerk of the United States House of Representatives, 2011). In addition,
lobbyists must only report one instance of previous government employment,
though, as we conservatively estimate below, nearly half of revolving door lobbyists
held multiple positions in government. This poorly designed disclosure procedure
means relying on self-reports alone signiﬁcantly underestimates the number of
revolving door lobbyists.
   Since our primary purpose is to accurately measure the size and scope of the
revolving door lobbyist population, we designed this project to exhaustively account
for lobbyists’ government employment histories. We ﬁrst draw a random sample of
registered lobbyists and then independently verify previous employment from a
variety of sources, including but not limited to the payroll and commercial directory
sources used in previous studies. Armed with more complete information about
individual lobbyists that are not readily available on lobbying disclosure reports, we
are able to test a hypothesis about how lobbyists’ connections to previous govern-
ment employers affect their clienteles.
   Our theory of interest representation departs from typical models. We assume that
individual lobbyists have inﬂuence on the policy process that is independent from
the organized interests they represent (Lowery and Marchetti, 2012). By treating
individual lobbyists as the unit of analysis, we contribute new insights into the debate
over lobbying as expert information exchange versus lobbying as access peddling.


Selling Access or Expertise? A Revolving Door Theory of Interest
Representation

Our central concern is whether revolving door lobbyists represent a qualita-
tively different clientele than their conventional, non-revolving door counterparts.
            © 2014 Macmillan Publishers Ltd. 2047-7414   Interest Groups & Advocacy      1–26             5
      LaPira and Thomas



Our objective is not to paint the lobbying profession with a broad or cynical brush.
Rather, we differentiate between those lobbyists who ﬁt the policy expert, information-
adjunct view and those who ﬁt the access-peddling perspective. We recognize that these
are not mutually exclusive characterizations, and both perspectives are descriptively
accurate. All lobbyists serve both an information function and an access function.
A lobbyist who has access to those in power but who cannot grapple with policy details
would not be useful to any organized interest. And vice versa, a policy expert who has
the ear of nobody in power will have little direct inﬂuence on the policy process.
   We assume that the popular use of the ‘access’ concept implies not only that
lobbyists know people in relevant government institutions, but also know those
institutions’ norms and routines. The problem is that these two quite different
behaviors are observationally equivalent if all we know is that a lobbyist commu-
nicates some policy preference to a policymaker. Accordingly, we seek to differ-
entiate kinds of lobbyists – those oriented more toward policy expertise from those
more inclined to trade on their access to the people in government who matter – by
exploring the kinds of interests they represent.
   If, in the aggregate, interest groups are defended for contributing ideas to policy
debates that affect them then we should expect organizations with similar political
and economic interests before the government to seek out the services of lobbyists
with policy domain-speciﬁc expertise. All else being equal, these expert lobbyists
will attract clients with very similar interests, even if they have competing pre-
ferences over speciﬁc policy alternatives. For instance, a lobbyist with technical
expertise on telecommunications policy will represent clients from the electronics
and communication industry, an agriculture lobbyist will represent food producer
clients and so on. Under the pluralist ideal, their connections ought not to matter, as
policymakers will seek out the information that is most useful to their efforts.1
   Conversely, the access-peddling perspective of lobbying suggests that lobbyists
with personal connections to those in ofﬁce and insider know-how will attract clients
irrespective of their underlying interests. Interest organizations will hire lobbyists for
their ability to get a foot in the door to key policymakers, not their hyper-specialized
knowledge of how regulations affect particular industries. As a result, revolving door
lobbyists will represent clients from a variety of unrelated economic sectors and
client portfolios will be much more diverse than their conventional counterparts.
   Drawing on these simple assumptions from the two dominant views on how
lobbyists represent organized interests, we can deduce a single, central hypothesis
about interest representation:
    Revolving Door Hypothesis: Lobbyists with previous employment in the
    federal government will represent clients from a more diverse set of economic
    sectors than conventional lobbyists who have not worked in government.
This straightforward expectation yields several intuitive hypothetical corollaries
about lobbyists with different kinds of government experience. First, revolving door
6            © 2014 Macmillan Publishers Ltd. 2047-7414   Interest Groups & Advocacy   1–26
                                                   Revolving door lobbyists and interest representation



lobbyists who held multiple jobs in the government will have more connections.
A lobbyist who worked in a single congressional ofﬁce will be much less attractive
to clients seeking access than one who worked in several ofﬁces, let alone one who
worked in both chambers of the legislature, multiple branches of government and so
on. Second, not all federal positions are equivalent. Former members of Congress,
staffers who worked in higher-ranking ofﬁces on Capitol Hill and White House
staffers will be valued for their connections more than others. Third, experience in
the executive branch differs between civil service and political appointees, so that
there will be differences between partisan appointees and career bureaucrats. These
bureaucrats-turned-lobbyists will more likely concentrate their attention to clients in
the industry their agencies regulated.
   Though our primary focus is on how former government employment affects the
diversity of lobbyists’ clienteles, we recognize that individual lobbyists differ by
more than whether or not they went through the revolving door. We thus account for
the lobbying industry’s labor market characteristics as well. Like all professionals,
lobbyists have distinct business models and occupational circumstances that will
necessarily impact clientele diversity despite their previous public service.2
   Contract lobbyists will unsurprisingly have a more diverse clientele. By deﬁnition,
in-house lobbyists will only have a single client: their employer. We also recognize
that in-house lobbyists may be hired explicitly for their insider knowledge or
connections. We do not suggest that their previous government work is immaterial.
But we would be remiss if we did not control for contract and in-house lobbying
when measuring clientele diversity.
   In addition, not all contract lobbyists have the same motivations in recruiting
clients. Some lobbyists work at large, general interest law and lobbying ﬁrms,
whereas other for-hire ﬁrms compete in niche markets. That is, lobbyists who work at
‘boutique’ ﬁrms that concentrate on particular issues, or market to clients from
speciﬁc geographic regions, industries or other categories, will not only have fewer
clients, but a more concentrated portfolio. It is reasonable to expect that different
kinds of ﬁrms will be home to lobbyists who book different clienteles, with large
ﬁrms more likely to represent a variety of economic interests.
   There are other specializations among lobbyists who ought to be associated with
patterns of interest representation as well. Some lobbyists specialize in legislative
policy, and others focus on legal and regulatory matters, while another group works
on appropriations earmarks. Lobbyists within advocacy specializations cater to
different clienteles, and so we expect that lobbyists who specialize in speciﬁc
advocacy activities will attract different clienteles than those who do not. For
example, appropriations lobbyists ought to be able to deliver government largesse
to any industry. Conversely, preparing highly technical amicus briefs or notice-and-
comment letters for proposed regulations requires a greater deal of speciﬁc legal and
policy expertise than run-of-the-mill legislative monitoring or appropriations ear-
marking (Furlong, 1997; Yackee, 2006). Therefore, legal and regulatory advocates
            © 2014 Macmillan Publishers Ltd. 2047-7414   Interest Groups & Advocacy      1–26             7
      LaPira and Thomas



will recruit industry-speciﬁc clienteles, and together these individual-level profes-
sional traits should explain a signiﬁcant amount of variation in the diversity of
lobbyists’ clienteles, regardless of their revolving door status.


Data on Revolving Door Lobbyists

On the basis of assumptions drawn from both the interest group literature and intui-
tion about the lobbying profession, we generated an original data set of lobbyists’
professional histories and lobbying activities from multiple sources. To create as
large and comprehensive a data set as possible, we:
1. drew a random sample of individual lobbyists registered in 2008;
2. conducted searches using multiple archival sources to record information about
   lobbyists’ government experience and subsequent lobbying specializations; and,
3. linked the coded sample of lobbyists to measures of their clienteles and lobbying
   activities from LDA reports ﬁled in 2008.
   We initially obtained lobbying disclosure data from the Center for Responsive
Politics (CRP) Lobbying Database for the years 1998–2008. The advantage of this
database is that CRP standardizes the names of LDA registrants, clients and
lobbyists. More importantly for our theory, they code clients by their primary
economic sector. Unlike the raw LDA data from the House or Senate public records
ofﬁces, we are conﬁdent that this data set is as accurate and complete as possible.
   To draw our sample, we constructed a list of unique, individual lobbyists based
on their names and identifying code, then drew a sample of 1622 lobbyists
(n = 11 per cent); 8 of these records were dropped as duplicates (that is, name dis-
ambiguation problems such as common names, name changes and false identifying
code matches).3 Table 1 compares descriptive statistics for the resulting 1614 in-
sample lobbyists to the roughly 13 000 lobbyists remaining in the sampling frame.
   Because our sampling frame includes data on each lobbyist’s contemporaneous
employment status, clients and activities in 2008, we can compare the in- and out-
sample across a variety of characteristics. We ﬁnd no statistically signiﬁcant differences
in the number of lobbyists who report being a covered ofﬁcial, who have served as a
member of Congress or who worked as a contract lobbyist.4 For each lobbyist, we are
also able to derive the number of disaggregated issue area-reports,5 the number of issue
areas in which they were active and the number of clients they reported lobbying for at
any time in 2008. Accordingly, we can conclude that our random sample is repre-
sentative, and we are conﬁdent in generalizing our ﬁndings to the population.
   Once the sample was drawn, three trained research assistants conducted compre-
hensive searches using a computer terminal in one of the author’s campus ofﬁce
throughout the 2011–2012 academic year. For each lobbyist, coders sequentially
searched each source for names and name variants.6 The coding scheme identiﬁed
8            © 2014 Macmillan Publishers Ltd. 2047-7414   Interest Groups & Advocacy   1–26
                                                     Revolving door lobbyists and interest representation



Table 1: Lobbyists’ characteristics in 2008, in- and out-of-sample

Variable                                                                  In-Sample                 Out-Sample

Number of Unique Lobbyists                                                   1614                     13 031
Proportion of Covered Ofﬁcials (in percentage)                               25.1                     24.2
Proportion of Former Members of Congress (in percentage)                      0.74                     1.15
Proportion of Contract Lobbyists (in percentage)                             40.0                     46.0
Number of LDA Issue Area-Reports
Mean                                                                         31.8                      30.4
Median                                                                       17.0                      14.0
Number of Active LDA Issue Areas (of 78)
Mean                                                                          7.4                           6.8
Median                                                                        5.0                           5.0
Number of LDA Clients
Mean                                                                          4.2                           4.2
Median                                                                        1.0                           1.0


lobbyists’ (i) previous employing ofﬁces in Congress, the White House and federal
bureaucracies and (ii) their employment status and advocacy specialties, as well as
partisan and campaign activities and demographic information.
   Although time-consuming and laborious, this manual search process provides a
rich data set of revolving door information. Previous work used innovative name-
matching techniques to combine data from two sources by linking lobbyists by name.
Alternatively, we start with a random sample of names drawn from all LDA report
and, then comprehensively search multiple sources to verify former government
employment. We found that the most fruitful searches relied on a variety of sources.
Speciﬁc job details, such as government employment tenure, that one source lacked
another often included, and vice versa. Though the availability of information for
some lobbyists was scarce, we are conﬁdent that these search and coding procedures
produced as thorough and accurate account of the revolving door as feasible.


The underreporting bias of covered ofﬁcials

The most immediate ﬁnding from this search process is that the public disclosure
requirements for covered ofﬁcial lobbyists clearly fall short of the transparency ideal.
Figure 1 compares the number of lobbyists who reported being a covered ofﬁcial to
our evidence that they in fact worked in the government.
   We code lobbyists as covered ofﬁcials if they reported it for any client in any
quarter in 2008. The LDA does not require lobbyists to continuously disclose their
revolving door status after initially doing so on a previous report on behalf of a client,
though it does not prevent them from doing so. Thus, we interpret this as a choice –
whether conscious or by default – to hide details about previous government work
from immediate public scrutiny.
              © 2014 Macmillan Publishers Ltd. 2047-7414   Interest Groups & Advocacy      1–26                   9
       LaPira and Thomas



              50%

              45%
                                                              Underreported "Covered Officials"
              40%

              35%

              30%

              25%

              20%

              15%

              10%

               5%

               0%
                           "Covered Official" Not Reported         Reported "Covered Official"
                                 No Federal Employment          Federal Employment Verified

Figure 1: The LDA’s revolving door transparency loophole.
Note: N = 1614 LDA registered lobbyists. Likelihood ratio χ2 (1) = 192.43, P<0.001.

   The results are remarkable. Only 29.7 per cent of lobbyists report their covered
ofﬁcial status, although 51.7 per cent of the sample was found to have held a position
in government. Of the roughly half of lobbyists who were found to have worked
in the government, two in three (67 per cent) chose not to report that information.
When we extrapolate to the full 2008 population, we estimate that approximately
3948 (±2.3 per cent margin of error) registered lobbyists chose not to disclose their
previous government employment in 2008.
   Several caveats about lobbying disclosure regulations are in order. First, policy
advocates, strategists and other consultants who do not register are excluded from
both the numerator and denominator, so our ﬁndings are limited to those lobbyists
who meet the narrow statutory deﬁnition of an active lobbyist. Second, our estimate
measures registered lobbyists in the year immediately after the passage of Honest
Leadership and Open Government Act, when a number of previously registered
lobbyists ‘de-registered’ to avoid disclosing certain campaign donations under new
disclosure requirements (Center for Responsive Politics, 2010). If anything, we may
be underestimating the revolving door. And, ﬁnally, our data represent merely
a 1-year snapshot. We cannot say how our 52 per cent revolving door estimate speaks
to speculation that K Street’s revolving door phenomenon has grown in recent years.
We can say with a great deal of conﬁdence, though, that this is the most complete and
accurate account of the revolving door lobbyist population to date.

Lobbyists’ previous federal government employment

Though our estimation of the size of the revolving door and our evidence of an
underreporting bias is novel, our primary empirical contribution is the level of detail
10            © 2014 Macmillan Publishers Ltd. 2047-7414     Interest Groups & Advocacy       1–26
                                                              Revolving door lobbyists and interest representation



Table 2: Number of federal government jobs held by sampled registered lobbyists

Federal Government Jobs                           Frequency                      Pct.                      Cumulative Pct.

1                                                       438                     52.5                             52.5
2                                                       230                     27.6                             80.1
3                                                       103                     12.4                             92.5
4                                                        38                      4.6                             97.0
5                                                        17                      2.0                             99.0
6                                                         5                      0.6                             99.6
7                                                         3                      0.4                            100.0
Total                                                   834                     100                              —

Note: N = 1495 lobbyist-job observations.




                 Congress                                                                          623



              White House                87



               Bureaucracy                              223



                  Judiciary       28




                              0         100       200         300      400       500         600          700
                                       Democrat          Nonpartisan/Unknown    Republican     Total

Figure 2: Lobbyists previously employed in the Federal government.
Note: N = 834 revolving door lobbyists. Some lobbyists may be in more than one category. Party
denominations refer to the party of the employing ofﬁce-holder.



in our account of lobbyists’ government careers. The 834 revolving door lobbyists
in our sample held a total of 1495 federal jobs. These individuals held an average of
1.8 (SD = 1.1) jobs and Table 2 shows how lobbyists are distributed by their number
of jobs. Nearly half – 47.5 per cent – held more than one federal job, though the
modal category is one. To suppose that lobbyists have connections to a single former
member of Congress or legislative committee is not a trivial assumption, but a serious
underestimation of the scope of the revolving door.
   In Figure 2, we disaggregate lobbyist-job observations by institution, the most
general classiﬁcation possible. Congressional experience is by far the most com-
mon among lobbyists, with more than three-fourths of the sample having worked
in Congress. Conversely, 23 per cent of the revolving door population has no
experience on Capitol Hill, while only a small number of lobbyists worked in the

              © 2014 Macmillan Publishers Ltd. 2047-7414            Interest Groups & Advocacy           1–26           11
      LaPira and Thomas




                     Member's Personal Office                               118


            Senate
                                  Committee                                              169

                                  Leadership             36



                     Member's Personal Office                                                            235


            House
                                  Committee                                        149

                                  Leadership            30


                                                0            50     100           150          200        250
                                                    Democrat      Unknown         Republican     Total

Figure 3: Lobbyists previously employed in Congress, by chamber.
Note: N = 624 revolving door lobbyists. Some lobbyists may be in more than one category. Party
denominations refer to the party of the employing ofﬁce-holder.


judicial branch.7 These ﬁndings alone are not inherently surprising, given the size
and organizational structure of Congress, but they also point to the legislative-centric
nature of lobbying disclosure statutory deﬁnitions. In addition, 121 (14.5 per cent)
revolving door lobbyists worked in both Congress and the executive branch.
Roughly 40 per cent of this subset worked in the White House.
   We also distinguish jobs by party as a face-reliability check. We code lobbyists’
former employers’ political party as Democrat, Nonpartisan/Unknown or Repub-
lican. The results are as might be expected. Congressional and White House
jobs are more likely to be partisan, though distributed fairly equally. Lobbyists
employed in Congress were split evenly at 43 per cent for both Democrats and
Republicans. Former White House employees were 55 per cent Republican and
34 per cent Democrat, which makes sense as our sample was drawn in the eighth
year of the George W. Bush administration. Conversely, former bureaucrats and
judiciary were much more likely to have been nonpartisan civil servants. Though
vague qualitative source material certainly introduced measurement error, these
partisan comparisons give us conﬁdence that the errors are not systematic across
job observations.
   We further disaggregate observations in Congress in Figure 3. Two patterns
reﬂect the idiosyncratic organizational features between the House and Senate.
First, House members’ personal ofﬁces are by far the most common employment
connection. Proportionally, however, there are only twice the numbers of
lobbyist-job observations in the House than in the Senate, even though there are
more than four times the number of ofﬁces. Second, in the House, there are 1.6
lobbyist-job observations for members to committees, whereas in the Senate there
are only 0.7. Intuitively, this description seems accurate as senators both sit on
more committees and tend to be allocated dedicated resources in committee
12           © 2014 Macmillan Publishers Ltd. 2047-7414             Interest Groups & Advocacy           1–26
                                                     Revolving door lobbyists and interest representation



Table 3: Climbing the congressional staff ladder to the revolving door

Congressional Staff Hierarchy                      Frequency                Pct.               Cumulative Pct.

Unknown/Legislative Support Agency                     60                    9.8                       9.8
Member’s Personal Ofﬁce Only                          244                   39.9                      49.7
Committee Only                                        191                   31.2                      80.9
Member and Committee                                   56                    9.2                      90.0
Leadership Only                                        25                    4.1                      94.1
Committee and Leadership                               26                    4.3                      98.4
Member, Committee and Leadership                       10                    1.6                     100.0

Note: N = 612 revolving door lobbyists. The 12 former members of Congress in the sample were not staff,
so are excluded from this scale.


ofﬁces to hire staffers who report directly to them. There is little reason to suspect
that Senate differences in revolving door connections are inherently more or less
appealing to interest groups. Though separate, they are coequal when it comes to
passing legislation.
   However, we expect that the higher the staffer’s position in the Congress, the more
connections she will have to exploit as a lobbyist. Table 3 presents the cumulative
frequency of the number of employment instances held by congressional staff
lobbyists in our sample.
   We also constructed a scale variable that ranges from the relatively low level of
cases of staffers whose employers were unidentiﬁable or were in a legislative support
service agency to a high level where an individual staffer held jobs in member,
committee and party leadership ofﬁces. The modal category includes lobbyists who
were solely employed in a member’s personal ofﬁce, though roughly 40 per cent of
our sampled lobbyists have experience in a committee and/or leadership ofﬁce.
   All told, our description of the revolving door is revealing. First, counter to
journalistic accounts, very few lobbyists are former members of Congress, although
we do not suggest the converse is untrue. According to one estimate, at least
53 per cent of retired or defeated members of the 111th Congress took jobs with
organizations registered to lobby (Center for Responsive Politics, 2011).8 Second,
the most common type of revolving door lobbyists are those who worked for a
House member, although a signiﬁcant portion worked in multiple jobs and in more
signiﬁcant positions on and off Capitol Hill. Finally, unlike previous revolving door
studies that focus exclusively on congressional employment, we show that a non-
trivial proportion of the revolving door population worked elsewhere in government.


Lobbying specializations

Our data also identify relevant professional characteristics of lobbyists regardless of
their revolving door status. Our theory does not assume that previous government
              © 2014 Macmillan Publishers Ltd. 2047-7414   Interest Groups & Advocacy      1–26              13
        LaPira and Thomas



Table 4: Comparison of conventional and revolving door lobbyists, by lobbyist occupation and advocacy
specialization

                                                   Previous Federal Employment                   Difference     z

                                          Revolving Door = 1           Conventional = 0

                                          Proportion         SE       Proportion          SE
                                        (in percentage)             (in percentage)

Lobbyist Occupation
  Contract Lobbyist                           50            0.017         30          0.016           20      8.15*
  General Interest Firm (n = 646)             85            0.017         84          0.023            1      0.18
Advocacy Specialization
  Legislative Policy/Process Advocacy         88            0.011         87          0.012            1      0.74
  Appropriations/Earmarks Advocacy            48            0.017         38          0.017           11      4.26*
  Regulatory/Legal Advocacy                   30            0.016         31          0.016            1      0.51

*P < 0.001.
Note: N = 834 revolving door lobbyists and 780 conventional lobbyists, and except for the comparison of
contract lobbyists who are either self-employed or work in small ﬁrms (n = 96) versus those who work in
large ﬁrms (n = 550). Differences are rounded.


experience alone will explain all the variation in the kinds of interests lobbyists
represent, so we identiﬁed contract and in-house lobbyists, contract lobbying ﬁrm
type, and lobbying specializations. Table 4 compares lobbyist type and advocacy
specializations between conventional and revolving door lobbyists, coded as a
dummy variable if we veriﬁed any previous government experience.
   First, we identiﬁed contract lobbyists in CRP’s lobbying database and coded
0 = in-house lobbyist and 1 = contract lobbyist. Revolving door lobbyists are more
likely to work as hired consultants than conventional lobbyists by a ratio of nearly
2:1. Second, among the subset of contract lobbyists, we distinguish between small,
special-interest boutique ﬁrms that explicitly promote themselves as focusing on one
or a few industries or issues = 0 and general interest ﬁrms = 1. Coders identiﬁed
large, typically well-known, general interest ﬁrms based on descriptions in their
company Websites, CRP’s ‘Top Lobbying Firms’ list, Lobbyists.info and the Lexis-
Nexis Martindale-Hubbell law directory. Though relatively few contract lobbyists
work for boutique ﬁrms – roughly 15 per cent – we expect general interest ﬁrms, by
deﬁnition, to attract clients with a wide variety of interests. There is no statistically
signiﬁcant difference between revolving door and conventional lobbyists who work
for general interest or boutique ﬁrms. Political journalists’ fascination with the large,
multimillion-dollar revenue-producing lobbying ﬁrms as home to the evils that
plague the political system is misguided. Just as many revolving door lobbyists work
in boutique lobbying shops as those who work for the K Street titans.
   Next, we code lobbyists as legislative policy and process experts = 1 if they focus
on policy issues in Congress. Empirically, this specialization is extremely common;
87 per cent of the sample specializes in legislative lobbying. But when we identify

14             © 2014 Macmillan Publishers Ltd. 2047-7414    Interest Groups & Advocacy        1–26
                                                     Revolving door lobbyists and interest representation



funding earmark specialists – coded as 1 if they reported lobbying on ‘Federal
Budget and Appropriations’ for any client in any quarter in 2008 – we ﬁnd that
revolving door lobbyists differ from their conventional counterparts. Revolving door
lobbyists are 27 per cent more likely to do appropriations lobbying. The ﬁnal
specialization – legal and regulatory advocacy – is slightly more common than
appropriations lobbying, although 60 per cent of these specialists are also legislative
advocacy specialists as well.


Lobbyists’ clienteles

In this section, we turn to developing a summary measure for lobbyists’ clienteles as
our dependent variable. CRP codes all lobbying clients by their primary economic
mission into 13-sector categories such as agribusiness, transportation, health and
ﬁnancial services. Table 5 summarizes three variables calculated from 51 475 quarterly
LDA reports ﬁled by our sample of lobbyists in all four quarters of 2008.
   The ﬁrst two variables are simple sums calculated from LDA reports, and the third
is a more complicated summary expression for clientele diversity. Lobbyists in our
sample represented just over four clients from two economic sectors on average in
2008, although by deﬁnition in-house lobbyists ought to have only a single client.9
Contract lobbyists alone represented an average of 8.4 (SD = 10.9) clients from
3.5 (SD = 2.7) sectors.
   Although both raw counts of clients and sectors reﬂect variation in the interests
that a given lobbyist represents, they pose a signiﬁcant measurement problem for the
concept of interest diversity. Consider this hypothetical: Lobbyist A and Lobbyist B
both represent 10 clients from the same 5 discrete economic sectors: agribusiness,
defense, telecommunication, ﬁnance and health. Ostensibly, their clientele diversity
is equal. However, what if Lobbyist A represents two clients from each of the ﬁve
sectors, and Lobbyist B represents one client each from the ﬁrst four sectors, and six
clients from health? Clearly, Lobbyist B is more of a health sector specialist than
Lobbyist A, who has a more diverse client portfolio.
   Therefore, we draw on the concept of information entropy to represent diversity
(Shannon, 1948; see also Ben-Naim, 2007). Following (Boydstun et al, forthcoming),


Table 5: Lobbyists’ clienteles, 2008

                                 Mean                 SD                   Minimum                    Maximum

Number of Clients                 4.2                 8.1                   1                           93
Number of Sectors                 2.1                 2.2                   1                           13
Clientele Diversity               0.13                0.22                  2.04−16                      0.88

Note: N = 1614. Clientele diversity is Shannon’s H entropy for clients’ sectors.

              © 2014 Macmillan Publishers Ltd. 2047-7414   Interest Groups & Advocacy      1–26             15
      LaPira and Thomas



we calculate a normalized Shannon’s H entropy score as a universal measure for clientele
economic sector diversity, which takes the form:
                                   P
                                - ni¼1 pðxi Þ*1n pðxi Þ
                                         1nðN Þ
where p(xi) is the proportion of clients from a speciﬁc sector and N is the total number of
sectors. This formula has the key property of accounting for variation in both the number
of clients, which is theoretically unlimited – although actually ranges from
1 to 93 – and the number of sectors, which is ﬁxed in a range from 1 to 13.
   Utilized recently by political scientists in the study of executive agendas (Jennings
et al, 2011), the news media (Boydstun, 2013) and organized interests’ policy engage-
ment (Halpin and Thomas, 2012), the Shannon’s H score provides the advantage of
accounting for local variations in lobbyists’ client portfolios. Simply summing clients
across industries would not capture the difference between lobbyists with multiple
clients in a single sector, and lobbyists with multiple clients in that sector in addition to a
variety of clients in other sectors. Boydstun et al (forthcoming) show that it is more
sensitive at low and high levels of diversity than the Herﬁndahl Hirschman Index, a
common measure of market concentration in economics, and the measure Gray and
Lowery (1996) adopted to test their ecological theory of interest group diversity.
   Interpreting this clientele diversity variable is straightforward. Simply, lobbyists
who represented a single client or multiple clients from the same sector would have
relatively low scores, whereas lobbyists who represented many clients, all of which
came from different economic sectors, would have relatively high scores. The
variable has a theoretical low ≈ 0, meaning the lobbyist’s clientele is highly
concentrated in a single economic sector. The actual value of the minimum clientele
diversity is 2.04−16, which reﬂects a lobbyist with a single client from a single sector,
by deﬁnition. Values above this minimum are distributed normally, so we treat the
variable as being left-censored. The theoretical high diversity score ≈1. The highest
score among sampled lobbyists is 0.88; this lobbyist represented 58 clients from
12 economic sectors.
   There are many ways to operationalize how lobbyists represent organizations
before government, but we believe this is the most meaningful, comprehensive and
generalizable way to summarize economic interest representation. We conceptualize
lobbyists who have a relatively narrow clientele as those with expertise relevant to
one or a few economic sectors. Alternatively, lobbyists with a relatively diverse
clientele epitomize the view that lobbyists whose ability to access those in power is
more important than sector-speciﬁc issue familiarity. We do not suggest a strict
dichotomy between lobbyists’ subject-matter expertise and their access or insider
knowledge; all successful lobbyists have some degree of expertise, knowledge and
access. We simply conceive of the level of clientele diversity as an empirical
manifestation of expertise or access. Even if lobbyists were to publicly report
their primary representational motivations, there is no reason to suspect that such
16           © 2014 Macmillan Publishers Ltd. 2047-7414   Interest Groups & Advocacy   1–26
                                                   Revolving door lobbyists and interest representation



self-reports would be valid observations. We thus infer lobbyists’ primary mode
of inﬂuence – access or expertise – based on the considerable variation in their
respective clienteles.


Explaining Lobbyists’ Clientele Diversity

Now we test our hypothesis that lobbyists’ clientele diversity is a function of their
previous government experience. Yet we face the problem that equally low clientele
diversity scores may be low for separate reasons. For instance, an in-house lobbyist
and a contract lobbyist with only a single client have identical clientele diversity
scores. The in-house lobbyist has a low diversity by nature of her employment
situation, whereas the contract lobbyist may report lobbying on behalf of a single
client for any number of reasons. The underlying reason why the contract lobbyist
chose a single client is unobserved in the disclosure data.10
   To address this feature of the lobbying disclosure data, we estimate two censored
regression models to account for government experience, lobbying occupations and
advocacy specialization. Both models appropriately treat the minimum clientele
entropy score as left-censored, although we estimate parameters under different
assumptions of which cases ought to be censored. In Model 1, we ﬁt a Tobit
regression model at the 2.04−16 interval. In other words, we lump together in-house
lobbyists with contract lobbyists with a single client, which censors 1113 lobbyists
from the normal distribution. Model 2 ﬁts the same right-hand-side predictors, except
it censors the 968 in-house lobbyists from the 646 contract lobbyists. Both models
assume that client diversity entropy scores in the uncensored cases are distributed
normally, although they ﬁt a maximum likelihood estimation that also assumes the
means in censored and uncensored cases’ clientele diversity is different than 0.
The sigma statistic allows us to reject the null hypothesis that the full model ﬁts the
left-censored distribution under both assumptions.
   Table 6 reports the results. Both models ﬁt the data well.11 The coefﬁcients are
difﬁcult to interpret because entropy accounts for local variation in both clients and
sectors, although the effects provide convincing evidence that the revolving door is
related to the lobbying-as-access view when we control for lobbyists occupations and
advocacy specializations.
   In Model 1, revolving door lobbyists increase their client diversity score by 0.06
for every additional job they held in the federal government, and 0.02 for every step
up the congressional staff hierarchy. And, as predicted, executive branch bureau-
crats-turned-lobbyists retain a more economically concentrated clientele than other
lobbyists. Lobbyists who were elected as members of Congress or who worked at the
White House, however, do not recruit clienteles that are different than other
lobbyists. Comparatively, the former members of Congress dummy variable have a
point estimate roughly ﬁve times that of the staffer hierarchy variable. But recall that
            © 2014 Macmillan Publishers Ltd. 2047-7414   Interest Groups & Advocacy      1–26             17
       LaPira and Thomas



Table 6: Revolving door lobbyists and clientele diversity

                                                    Model 1                              Model 2

                                              b               Robust SE            b            Robust SE

Previous Federal Employment
Number of Government Positions              0.058**             0.015           0.037*             0.012
Former Member of Congress                   0.111               0.124          −0.004              0.073
Congressional Staff Hierarchy               0.020*              0.010           0.017*             0.008
White House                                 0.006               0.050           0.010              0.043
Bureaucracy                                −0.083               0.034          −0.034              0.026
Lobbyist Occupation
Contract Lobbyist                            0.550**            0.081             —                 —
General Interest Firm                        0.107*             0.040            0.391**           0.009
Advocacy Specialization
Legislative Policy/Process                 −0.039               0.040          −0.019              0.027
Appropriations/Earmarks                     0.184**             0.024           0.107**            0.017
Regulatory/Legal                           −0.053*              0.026          −0.068**            0.019
Intercept                                  −0.634**             0.049          −0.516**            0.030
Sigma                                       0.343               0.012           0.229              0.006
Log pseudolikelihood                     −486.32                  —           −44.21                —
Pseudo R2                                   0.51                  —             0.95                —
Uncensored observations                     501                   —              646                —

* P < 0.05; ** P < 0.001.
Note: N = 1614 lobbyists. The dependent variable is clientele diversity, or the lobbyists’ Shannon’s H
entropy for clients’ economic interests. Coefﬁcients are censored regression parameter estimates. Model 1
has a ﬁxed left censor at 2.04−16, the minimum value. Both in-house lobbyists and contract lobbyists with a
single client are censored. Model 2 is censored by contract lobbyists.


there are only 12 former members in the lobbyist sample, so there is insufﬁcient
variation in their clientele diversity and the standard error is high by comparison.
   This particular ﬁnding is meaningful not because of our inability to reject the null
hypothesis for former legislators, but simply because former members are so rare in
the larger population of lobbyists. Former members are so uncommon that the error
term obscures the effects on the model. Yet, we have little doubt that the unique
experiences of congressional membership afford them special privileges as lobbyists.
Indeed, in an interview with political scientist Beth Leech, former Representative
Bob Walker states it outright:
     I think that the reason why former members have a great deal of value inside
     the process is simply because we’ve been there. We’ve been a part of the
     club. We maintained some ties to the club. That gives us some credibility.
     (Leech 2013, p. 23)
Thus, we interpret this null ﬁnding with a grain of salt. The 10 contract-lobbyist
former members do not have signiﬁcantly more diverse clienteles than the typical

18            © 2014 Macmillan Publishers Ltd. 2047-7414   Interest Groups & Advocacy   1–26
                                                   Revolving door lobbyists and interest representation



revolving door contract lobbyist in the sample, but they likely play a different role for
the clients they do have.
   Moreover, these revolving door effects are in addition to controls for occupations
and specializations described above.12 As expected, contract lobbying has the strongest
effect when cases are censored at the minimum. For-hire lobbyists who work at general
interest lobbying ﬁrms are also positively associated with clientele diversity. These two
associations are not surprising given the business models of for-hire lobbyists.
   Finally, lobbyists who specialize in appropriations lobbying do not represent the
same set of interests as other lobbyists. This effect is extremely telling, as Federal
Budget & Appropriations is the single most popular LDA issue area for interest
groups to report activity since Senate records became electronically available in
1998 (Center for Responsive Politics, 2013). Appropriations lobbyists specialize in
getting their clients in the door for the ask, not because they master complex,
technical issue details. This specialty applies to clients from any economic sector. It
makes intuitive sense that appropriations lobbyists have more diverse clienteles. The
opposite is true for legal and regulatory advocates, who have 0.06 more concentrated
clienteles than other lobbyists. Specializing in legislative lobbying – the default –
makes no difference in lobbyists’ client portfolios.
   In Model 2, we drop the contract lobbying variable as a predictor and instead use it
to determine which observations to censor. The full model ﬁt improves signiﬁcantly
over Model 1, although we recognize that censoring in-house lobbyists from the
normal distribution is arbitrary, as contract lobbyists with a single client are
effectively identical. The patterns of association remain consistent in the second
estimation, with the exception of lobbyists who previously worked in a federal
bureaucracy. The coefﬁcient for former bureaucrats is similar and in the same
direction, but we fail to reject the null hypothesis (t = −1.36; P = 0.17).
   Overall, our expectations about previous government employment predict clien-
tele diversity well. If our elaboration of the insider-access versus information-supply
perspectives on lobbying is accurate, and if our clientele diversity measure is a valid
proxy for the concept, then we ﬁnd telling empirical evidence that the revolving door
indeed matters for how interests are represented in Washington. The professional
connections and experience that come with having worked in government give these
lobbyists certain privileges, and they exploit these advantages to recruit clients from
the full spectrum of economic interests. In doing so, we can infer that revolving door
lobbying fails to meet the deliberative interest representation ideal, even if outright
corruption is absent.


Extensions and Future Research

We present here what we believe to be the most comprehensive study to date on the
size and shape of the revolving door community in the ranks of Washington
            © 2014 Macmillan Publishers Ltd. 2047-7414   Interest Groups & Advocacy      1–26             19
      LaPira and Thomas



lobbyists, as well as its effects on interest representation. This project does have its
limitations, so we make three general recommendations for future research on the
revolving door.
   First, our sample was limited only to the roughly 13 000 lobbyists who actually
ﬁled disclosure reports in 2008. It is absurd to think that LDA-registered lobbyists
are the only people in Washington’s private sector who attempt to inﬂuence the
public policy process. Notable recent examples include former Senate Majority
Leader Tom Daschle (D-SD) – now Senior Policy Advisor at DLA Piper, a major
Washington lobbying ﬁrm – and former Speaker of the House Newt Gingrich
(R-GA) – whose strategic ‘historical’ advice-for-pay to Freddie Mac after he left
Congress became a contentious topic in the 2012 Republican presidential nomina-
tion contest. Future work should compare government careers from a similarly
representative sample of unregistered lobbyists to the present sample (see LaPira
and Thomas, 2013).
   Second, the biographical search process was inadequate to collect inter-
nally reliable information on revolving door lobbyists’ seniority, tenure and
policy specialization when they worked inside government. Each of these
variables could serve as meaningful covariates for the models presented here.
This shortcoming was not due to a lack of effort, but rather a lack of good
information. Such details about individuals are hard to come by from public
and proprietary sources. Other methods of data collection, such as elite interviews
and surveys of lobbyists regarding their employment histories, may be more
fruitful.
   Third, this project only looked at the subsequent private sector side of
the revolving door. Future work should identify individuals who go back and
forth between the private and public sector, especially before and after signiﬁ-
cant institutional events like a new administration or party change in Congress,
or interventions such as institutional changes in ‘cooling-off’ periods and
other lobbying restrictions for government employees (Drutman and Cain,
forthcoming). The ﬁndings we present here address the revolving door after
lobbyists have already gone through it, and not the possibility of post-government
employment offered as some form of deferred bribe for favors granted while in
government.
   Finally, and most importantly, we do not measure lobbying outcomes or
success (Baumgartner et al, 2009; Lazarus and McKay, 2012), even though the
study of inﬂuence presumes that lobbying does inﬂuence policy outcomes. We
can make the inference that interest organizations would not be differentially
attracted to revolving door lobbyists if they did not prove their worth when it
came to generating favorable outcomes, but we do not document it here. Future
work on revolving door lobbying ought to measure its effect on policy change,
though this holy grail of interest group inﬂuence is challenging to observe
directly.
20           © 2014 Macmillan Publishers Ltd. 2047-7414   Interest Groups & Advocacy   1–26
                                                   Revolving door lobbyists and interest representation



Implications and Discussion

Our theory of the revolving door and the evidence we present to support its claims
have implications for both lobbying reform and the study of interest representation.
If we are primarily concerned about open government and lobbying transparency
then the evidence presented here veriﬁes anecdotal evidence that disclosure is
inadequate. We advocate enhancing lobbying transparency by expanding the
statutory deﬁnitions of lobbying activities and requiring that lobbyists disclose more
information about government employment. It would not be a signiﬁcant cost to
lobbyists to submit an accurate resume or other uniform account of their work history
in the government. It ought not take hundreds of labor hours to reconstruct this
information for a small sample as our project has.
   We also recommend that disclosure regulations ought to shift at least some of the
reporting burden to government personnel, though we expect this option to be least
palatable to the very politicians who would need to change the law. For instance,
members of Congress, White House staff and bureaucrats ought to publicly disclose
contact with previous employees and colleagues if the contact is ofﬁcial in nature, or
face ethics penalties. If we really want to slow the revolving door, we ought to hold
government ofﬁcials democratically accountable for their part in the relationship as
well.
   More importantly, enforcement is all but non-existent because it would take an
inordinate amount of resources – as well as political commitment – to verify
disclosure accuracy. The underreporting bias alone should raise eyebrows, though it
is likely just the tip of the iceberg of lobbyists who deliberately ﬂout the transparency
norm, even if they are technically compliant with the law when they do so.
   If the normative concern is to limit the movement of powerful government insiders
to the private inﬂuence industry then the results presented here should offer some
caution. First, hyper-attention to only the highest-ranking former public ofﬁcials may
make for good headlines, but those individuals are only a tiny fraction of the
revolving door population. Former members of Congress are different, but rare.
Second, and perhaps more importantly, the revolving door effect on lobbying
behavior is not absolute. We simply cannot label lobbyists with prior government
experience as crooks; after all, lobbying pariah Jack Abramoff spent his entire career
in the private sector. Our ﬁndings suggest that the connection between public service
and private inﬂuence is multifaceted, so reformers ought to seek better information
on the revolving door phenomenon before advocating lobbying employment bans,
activity restrictions or other economic penalties for activities that are, after all,
protected speech.
   For social scientists engaged in basic research on interest representation in
American politics, our ﬁndings suggest that the interest group literature lacks both
good theory and good data on individual lobbyist-agents and their impact on the
policy process. First, the variation in the client representation between individual
            © 2014 Macmillan Publishers Ltd. 2047-7414   Interest Groups & Advocacy      1–26             21
       LaPira and Thomas



lobbyists that we show highlights a weakness in the extant literature on interest
groups. Theories of interest group mobilization and inﬂuence explicitly or implicitly
assume that the appropriate unit of analysis is the interest organization, not the
lobbyist. Though not wrong, these theories are simply incomplete if they do not also
account for the kinds of knowledge, expertise and access that individual lobbyists sell
at a premium to the highest bidder.
   Students of interest group politics have long demonstrated the system’s
tremendous representational bias toward well-moneyed interests, suggesting
Schattschneider’s (1960 [1975]) warning about the heavenly chorus continues
unabated. If indeed the revolving door signiﬁcantly distorts the representation of
interests before government, then we need to know more about how the already
well represented seek entrance by hiring those who hold the right keys.


Acknowledgements

This research was supported by a 2012 American Political Science Association Small
Research Grant. We would like to thank James Madison University students Zuleika
Lim, Gwen Murtha and Rachel Wein for their assistance and Frank Baumgartner,
Lee Drutman, Beth Leech, Sean Lowry and Jacob Straus for comments on previous
versions of this article.


Notes

 1 We do not assume relatively ﬁxed economic interests and relatively volatile political issues to be
   perfectly aligned. But we do assume that issue expert lobbyists will tend to represent a set of
   organizations with highly similar interests.
 2 Though a revolving door lobbyist’s work sequentially precedes their lobbying employment in time,
   it is neither a necessary nor sufﬁcient condition for that employment. Accordingly, we treat pre-
   vious government work status and current lobbying employment status as independent, though
   we empirically examine the relationship between those select lobbyists who had worked for the
   government.
 3 By deﬁnition, the identities of registered lobbyists is public information. However, we choose to keep
   them anonymous here. Lobbyists’ names will be made available by the authors upon request for
   replication purposes.
 4 The two-sample difference in mean test for former members of Congress suggests that the 0.41 per cent
   nominal difference is not signiﬁcantly different from 0, z = 1.49, P = 0.135.
 5 LD-2 reports are ﬁled at the registrant-client level of analysis. Individual lobbyists may be listed for as
   few or as many issue areas mentioned on these reports. This measure disaggregates these reports to the
   lobbyist-issue area level, and sums.
 6 A description of the original sources coders used to identify biographical data for each lobbyist can be
   found in Table A1 in the appendix.
 7 Typically, these jobs were as judicial clerks, which does not match the intuitive deﬁnition of the
   revolving door. We report them here, but exclude them from subsequent analyses.

22            © 2014 Macmillan Publishers Ltd. 2047-7414   Interest Groups & Advocacy     1–26
                                                     Revolving door lobbyists and interest representation



 8 CRP’s study is not a direct comparison to our sample, as they do not distinguish former members of
   Congress employed by the private sector who do or do not register to lobby.
 9 Thirty-three in-house lobbyists had more than one client in 2008 because they switched employers at
   some point during the calendar year. In these cases, we coded the lobbyist’s contract status according to
   their destination employer as listed in the fourth quarter, and treat the results as measurement error.
10 The LDA requires lobbyists to report clients only if they earned US$5000 or more on their behalf on
   lobbying activities. Many lobbyists consult clients on legal and public relations matters as well, so
   while they may continue under retainer in a given reporting period, they may be engaged in activities
   that do not require reporting.
11 In both models, we assume that revolving door effects on clientele diversity do not decay over time –
   having previously worked in the federal government is an individual characteristic that remains
   important to client recruitment over time. To consider the potential for endogeneity, we examined a
   two-stage version of Model 1 that predicted revolving door status on lobbying specialization in the ﬁrst
   stage. Estimation results did not signiﬁcantly differ from those reported in Table 6.
12 We also collected data on the timing and duration of former government positions, but we are not
   conﬁdent enough in their reliability for inclusion in our analysis. Data were missing for more than half
   of the sampled lobbyists. Duration and timing data can be identiﬁed for more recently employed
   lobbyists who worked in Congress using the LegiStorm database, but most lobbyists’ biographies do
   not explicitly state start and end dates of government employment.




References

Bauer, R.A., Pool, Ithiel de Sola and Dexter, L.A. (1963) American Business and Public Policy:
   The Politics of Foreign Trade. New York: Atherton Press.
Baumgartner, F.R. and Leech, B.L. (1998) Basic Interests: The Importance of Groups in Politics and in
   Political Science. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
Baumgartner, F.R., Berry, J.M., Hojnacki, M., Kimball, D.C. and Leech, B.L. (2009) Lobbying and Policy
   Change: Who Wins, Who Loses, and Why. Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press.
Ben-Naim, A. (2007) Entropy Demystiﬁed: The Second Law Reduced to Plain Common Sense.
   Hackensack, NJ: World Scientiﬁc Publishing Company.
Bertrand, M., Bombardini, M. and Trebbi, F. (2011) Is It Whom You Know or What You Know?
   An Empirical Assessment of the Lobbying Process. National Bureau of Economic Research Working
   Paper 16765.
Blanes i Vidal, J., Mirko, D. and Christian, F.-R. (2012) Revolving door lobbyists. American Economic
   Review 102(7): 3731–3748.
Boydstun, A.E. (2013) Making the News: Politics, Media and Agenda-Setting. Chicago, IL: University of
   Chicago Press.
Boydstun, A.E., Bevan, S. and Thomas, II H.F. (forthcoming) The importance of agenda diversity and how
   to measure it. Policy Studies Journal.
Center for Responsive Politics. (2010) The Deregistration Dilemma: Are Lobbyists Quitting the Business
   as Federal Disclosure Rules Tighten? Washington DC: Center for Responsive Politics.
Center for Responsive Politics. (2011) Revolving Door: Former Members of the 111th Congress,
   http://www.opensecrets.org/revolving/departing.php, accessed 8 February 2013.
Center for Responsive Politics. (2013) Lobbying: Top Issues, Lobbying Database, http://www.opensecrets.
   org/lobby/top.php?indexType=u, accessed 8 February 2013.
Citizens for Responsibility and Ethics in Washington. (2012) Strategic Maneuvers: The Revolving Door
   from the Pentagon to the Private Sector. Washington, DC: Center for Responsibility and Ethics in
   Washington.

              © 2014 Macmillan Publishers Ltd. 2047-7414   Interest Groups & Advocacy      1–26             23
       LaPira and Thomas



Clerk of the United States House of Representatives. (2011) Lobbying Disclosure Act Guidance.
   Washington DC: House Legislative Resource Center.
Cohen, J.E. (1986) The dynamics of the ‘revolving door’ on the FCC. American Journal of Political
   Science 30(4): 689–708.
Deakin, J. (1966) The Lobbyists. Washington DC: Public Affairs Press.
Drutman, L. and Cain, B.E. (forthcoming) Congressional staff and the revolving door: The impact of
   regulatory change. Election Law Journal.
Eggers, A.C. (2010) The Partisan Revolving Door. Working Paper.
Eggers, A.C. and Hainmueller, J. (2009) MPs for sale? Returns to ofﬁce in postwar British politics.
   American Political Science Review 103(4): 1–21.
Esterling, K.M. (2004) The Political Economy of Expertise. Ann Arbor, MI: The University of Michigan
   Press.
Fried, C., Gordon, R.H., Potter, T. and Sandler, J.E. (2011) Lobbying Law in the Spotlight: Challenges and
   Proposed Improvements. Washington DC: American Bar Association Task Force on Federal Lobbying
   Laws.
Furlong, S.R. (1997) Interest group inﬂuence on rulemaking. Administration and Society 29: 325–48.
González-Bailon, S., Jennings, W. and Lodge, M. (2013) Politics in the boardroom: Corporate pay,
   networks and recruitment of former parliamentarians, ministers and civil servants in Britain. Politics
   Studies 61(4): 850–873.
Gormley, W.T. (1979) A test of the revolving door hypothesis at the FCC. American Journal of Political
   Science 23(4): 665–683.
Gray, V. and Lowery, D. (1996) The Population Ecology of Interest Representation. Ann Arbor:
   University of Michigan Press.
Hall, R.L. and Deardorff, A.V. (2006) Lobbying as legislative subsidy. American Political Science Review
   100(1): 69–84.
Halpin, D.R. and Thomas, III H.F. (2012) Evaluating the breadth of policy engagement by organized
   interests. Public Administration 90(3): 589–599.
Hansen, J.M. (1991) Gaining Access: Congress and the Farm Lobby, 1991-1981. Chicago, IL: University
   of Chicago Press.
Heinz, J.P., Laumann, E.O., Nelson, R.L. and Salisbury, R.H. (1993) The Hollow Core: Private Interests
   in National Policy Making. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Herring, P. (1929) Group Representation before Congress. Baltimore, MD: Johns Hopkins University Press.
Jennings, W. et al (2011) Effects of the core functions of government on the diversity of executive agendas.
   Comparative Political Studies 44(8): 1001–1030.
LaPira, T.M. and Thomas, III H.F. (2013) Just how many Newt Gingrich’s are there on K Street?
   Estimating the true size and shape of Washington’s revolving door. Presented at the Annual Meeting of
   the Midwest Political Science Association. Chicago, IL.
Lazarus, J. and McKay, A. (2012) Consequences of the revolving door: Evaluating the lobbying success of
   former congressional members and staff. Paper Presented at the Midwest Political Science Association
   Annual Conference. Chicago, IL.
Leech, B.L. (2013) Lobbyists at Work. New York: Apress Media.
Lessig, L. (2011) Republic, Lost: How Money Corrupts Congress – And a Plan to Stop It. New York:
   Twelve Books.
Loomis, B.A. (2007) Does K Street run through Capitol Hill? Lobbying congress in the Republican era.
   In: A.J. Cigler and B.A. Loomis (eds.) Interest Group Politics, 7th edn. Washington DC: CQ Press,
   pp. 412–430.
Lowery, D. and Marchetti, K. (2012) You don’t know Jack: Principals, agents, and lobbying. Interest
   Groups and Advocacy 1(2): 139–170.
Mansbridge, J. (1992) A deliberative theory of interest representation. In: M.P. Petracca (ed.) The Politics
   of Interests. Boulder: Westview Press, pp. 32–57.

24            © 2014 Macmillan Publishers Ltd. 2047-7414   Interest Groups & Advocacy   1–26
                                                     Revolving door lobbyists and interest representation



McGuire, K.T. (2000) Lobbyists, revolving doors, and the US Supreme Court. Journal of Law and Politics
   16: 113–137.
Milbrath, L.W. (1963) The Washington Lobbyists. Chicago, IL: Rand McNally.
Public Citizen. (2005) Congressional revolving doors: The journey from congress to K Street. Congress
   Watch (July). Washington DC: Public Citizen.
Quirk, P. (1981) Industry Inﬂuence in Federal Regulatory Agencies. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University
   Press.
Revolving Door Working Group. (2005) A Matter of Trust: How the Revolving Door Undermines Public
   Conﬁdence in Government – And What to Do About It. Washington DC: The Revolving Door Working
   Group.
Salisbury, R.H., Johnson, P., Heinz, J.P., Laumann, E.O. and Nelson, R.L. (1989) Who you know versus
   what you know: The uses of government experience for Washington lobbyists. American Journal of
   Political Science 33(1): 175–195.
Schattschneider, E.E. (1960 [1975]) The Semisovereign People. New York: Wadsworth.
Shannon, C.E. (1948) A mathematical theory of communication. Bell System Technical Journal 27(3):
   379–423.
Washington Post Editorial Board. (2012) Congress’s Revolving Door. Editorial, Washington Post
   8 December, http://www.washington.post.com/opinions/congress-revolving-door/2012/12/08/c59de32c-
   40ae-11e2-a2d9-822f58ac9fd5_story.html.
Yackee, S.W. (2006) Sweet-talking the fourth branch: Assessing the inﬂuence of interest group comments
   on federal agency rulemaking. Journal of Public Administration Research and Theory 16: 103–124.
Zeigler, H. and Baer, M. (1969) Lobbying: Interactions and Inﬂuence in American State Legislatures.
   Belmont, CA: Wadsworth.




              © 2014 Macmillan Publishers Ltd. 2047-7414   Interest Groups & Advocacy      1–26             25
         LaPira and Thomas



Appendix


Table A1: Original Source Materials For Lobbyists’ Previous Employment

Source                       Availability   Description                    Qualitative Data

Senate Ofﬁce of Public Public            Searchable, raw LD-1 and LD- Includes only LD-2 reports as
  Records (SOPR)                           2 lobbying disclosure         submitted and ﬁled by LDA
  Lobbying Disclosure                      reports.                      registrants, so it includes
  Database                                                               reporting and name
                                                                         disambiguation errors, and no
                                                                         client information beyond
                                                                         organization's name.
CRP Lobbying                 Public      Cleaned and coded database of Includes all information from
  Database                                 every LD-2 lobbying report    SOPR database, with client and
                                           on ﬁle with SOPR, 1998-       lobbyist names disambiguated
                                           present.                      at a greater than 95%
                                                                         completion rate, and codes
                                                                         clients for 13 economic sectors.
CRP Revolving Door           Public      Selected LDA registered       Includes all self-reported
  Database                                 lobbyists and non-            biographical data on ﬁle with
                                           registered advocates.         Lobbyists.info in 2007, updated
                                                                         periodically from media reports
                                                                         on personnel changes.
Congressional                Proprietary All LDA registered lobbyists Links registered lobbyists to
  Quarterly First                          on ﬁle with Clerk of the      entries in Congressional Staff
  Street Database                          House since 2004.             and Federal Staff directories
                                                                         from 1993 to present.
Lobbyists.info               Proprietary Selected LDA registered       Includes all self-reported
  Directory                                lobbyists and non-            biographical data on ﬁle with
                                           registered advocates.         Lobbyists.info.
Lexis-Nexis                  Proprietary Selected attorneys.           Includes all self-reported
  Martindale-Hubbell                                                     biographical data on ﬁle with
  Directory                                                              Martindale-Hubbell.
LegiStorm Pro                Proprietary Selected LDA registered       Includes database of all
  Directory                                lobbyists and non-            congressional staff salaries,
                                           registered advocates.         supplemented with additional
                                                                         sources from media reports and
                                                                         public sources.
Firm / Organization          Public      Selected LDA registered       Includes self-reported
   Websites                                lobbyists and non-            biographical data, as published
                                           registered advocates.         by the lobbyists' current
                                                                         employers.
LinkedIn Social              Membership Selected LDA registered        Includes self-reported
  Network                                  lobbyists and non-            biographical data, as published
                                           registered advocates.         by the lobbyists' themselves in
                                                                         their professional proﬁles.




26               © 2014 Macmillan Publishers Ltd. 2047-7414   Interest Groups & Advocacy   1–26
