Interest Groups & Advocacy
https://doi.org/10.1057/s41309-019-00074-9

    ORIGINAL ARTICLE



Opaque: an empirical evaluation of lobbying transparency
in the UK

Amy Melissa McKay1              · Antal Wozniak2


© The Author(s) 2020



Abstract
The government of the UK is reputed to be among the world’s most transparent
governments. Yet in comparison with many other countries, its 5-year-old register
of lobbyists provides little information about the lobbying activity directed at the
British state. Further, its published lists of meetings with government ministers are
vague, delayed, and scattered across numerous online locations. Our analysis of
more than 72,000 reported ministerial meetings and nearly 1000 lobbying clients
and consultants reveals major discrepancies between these two sources of informa-
tion about lobbying in the UK. Over the same four quarters, we find that only about
29% of clients listed in the lobby register appear in the published record of ministe-
rial meetings with outside groups, and less than 4% of groups disclosed in ministe-
rial meetings records appear in the lobby register. This wide variation between the
two sets of data, along with other evidence, contribute to our conclusion that the
Government could have made, and still should make, the lobby register more robust.

Keywords Lobbying · Government transparency · Lobbying regulation · Interest
groups · British lobbying · UK Office of the Registrar of Consultant Lobbyists


Introduction

The UK ranks number one in the world in terms of the openness of its government
data.1 This puts the UK ahead of, respectively, the USA, France, Canada, Germany,
and Japan. The British public has access to open data regarding budget, spending,
1
  This ranking is conducted by the World Wide Web Foundation in the third edition of its Open Data
Barometer Global Report (2016), available at http://opend​ataba​romet​er.org.

* Amy Melissa McKay
  A.McKay@exeter.ac.uk
      Antal Wozniak
      A.Wozniak@liverpool.ac.uk
1
      University of Exeter, Exeter, UK
2
      University of Liverpool, Liverpool, UK


                                                                               Vol.:(0123456789)
                                                                                A. M. McKay, A. Wozniak


legislation, elections, British companies, trade, the performance of education and
health agencies, crime, and more. Yet when it comes to lobbying, the UK is still
quite opaque.
   Following a high volume of scandals, as well as domestic and international pres-
sure, the Conservative–Liberal Democrat Government created in 2014 the Office of
the Registrar of Consultant Lobbyists. The overdue register this office oversees is
notably weaker than advocates requested, and it is inadequate compared to lobby-
ing disclosure laws in many other countries. Similarly, the data the Government has
published since 2010 about ministerial meetings with external groups are unwieldy,
unclear, and unpunctual. We identify five aspects that together suggest that the Gov-
ernment purposely chose to keep lobbying in the UK in the dark. These findings are
summarized as follows:

1. Lobbying regulation in the UK is among the very weakest of countries that have
   developed lobbying disclosure laws;
2. The set of lobby clients listed in the register is significantly different from the set
   of groups with whom ministerial offices report having met;
3. Collating information about ministerial meetings is too burdensome for any lay-
   person to do;
4. The debate surrounding lobbying transparency as the law was being written made
   clear that the proposal was not robust enough; and
5. Lobbying clients meet more frequently with Government ministers than unreg-
   istered groups, and a small number of lobby clients dominate over the others.

   In short, we join with others (Chari et al. 2019; Pegg 2015; McGrath 2009; Miller
and Dinan 2008; Jordan 1998) who recognize the need for a more robust lobbying
regime in the UK.


UK lobbying regulation in international comparison

In recent years, the world has seen a remarkable expansion of lobbying regulations.
In 2000, there were five national or supranational jurisdictions with lobbying disclo-
sure requirements—the U.S. (1946, 1996, 2008), Germany (19512), Canada (1989,
2003, 2008), Georgia (1998), and the European Parliament (1996).3 Since then,
13 additional countries have established lobbying regulations—Lithuania (2001),
Poland (2005), Taiwan (2008), Israel (2008, 2010), France (2009, 2016), Mexico
(2010), Slovenia (2010), Netherlands (2012), Austria (2013), Chile (2013), the UK
(2014), Ireland (2015), and Italy (2017)—as well as the European Commission
(2008). Lobbying reform has been attempted but has failed to fully materialize in
Brazil, Croatia, the Czech Republic, Spain, and other jurisdictions, including Hun-
gary, where a lobbying reform law was adopted (2006) and then repealed (2011),

2
  Despite being among the first countries to regulate lobbying, Germany’s lobbying regulations are com-
parably quite weak (Ronit and Schneider 1998).
3
  In addition, all 50 U.S. states have a degree of lobbying regulation (Newmark 2005).
Opaque: an empirical evaluation of lobbying transparency…


and North Macedonia, where a law was created but never implemented (Holman
and Luneburg 2012; Crepaz 2017b). The rapid expansion is partly due to successful
policy learning/transfer/diffusion (Radaelli 2000; Graham, Shipan and Volden 2013)
and partly due to external and internal pressure (e.g., Pegg 2015; Miller and Dinan
2008). Such pressure is often instigated by widespread media attention to lobbying
scandals (Allen 2002; Ozymy 2013).
   The Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD) in 2014
asserted that governments should require lobbying activities to be disclosed in a
manner that is transparent and accessible to the general public. OECD highlights
five elements of effective regulation: an unambiguous definition of lobbying; dis-
closure of funding sources; disclosure of lobbying targets; clear standards of behav-
ior regarding especially revolving-door practices; and appropriate monitoring and
enforcement. Similarly, the U.S. Center for Public Integrity (CPI) defines eight key
components of lobbying regulation (2003). In its view, effective lobbying regula-
tions should unambiguously define lobbying; mandate the registration of individual
lobbyists and clients by name; require disclosure of expenditures on lobbying by cli-
ent and lobby firm; provide for electronic filing; ensure public access to the registry;
include enforcement provisions; and specify revolving-door provisions, especially
cooling-off periods for government employees. Opheim (1991), Newmark (2005),
and Holman and Luneburg (2012) have similarly developed criteria for assessing
the robustness of lobbying regimes; Chari et al. (2019) find that the correlations
between these methods and those of the CPI are .80, .62, and .65, respectively. While
the CPI criteria, especially the focus on disclosure of financial information, may be
more suitable for the U.S. than for other jurisdictions (Chari et al. 2019), Chari et al.
(2019) rate CPI’s index as having the highest content validity among these alterna-
tives (i.e., it best captures the robustness of a lobbying regime). As such, our criteria
for evaluating the lobbying regulations in the UK are based primarily on those of the
CPI.
   At the high end of robustness of lobbying regulatory schemes, the Center for
Public Integrity gives the U.S. 62 out of 100 possible points. At the federal level
in the U.S., lobbying is clearly defined as contacting officials about matters of
public policy. Anyone who spends more than 20% of their time communicating
with government officials in either the legislative or executive branch and is paid
more than $3000 for a client in a quarter (or $11,500 for in-house lobbyists) must
register. Every quarter lobbying organizations report the identities of their clients,
the names of individual lobbyists working for each client, the issue areas about
which they lobby for each client, as well as the bill numbers or titles of legisla-
tion they lobby about for each client and in each issue area. Failure to report is
punishable by up to a year in prison and a fine of up to $50,000.4 The House
defeated an amendment that would have created an enforcement agency, however
(Chari et al. 2019, 22). Since 2008, U.S. lobbyists must also disclose their own


4
  According to the law, “knowingly and willfully” failing to report may be punished by up to one year in
prison and a fine of up to $50,000; “knowingly and corruptly” failing to comply may result in up to five
years in prison and a fine of up to $200,000.
                                                                   A. M. McKay, A. Wozniak


federal campaign contributions and those of any political action committee (PAC)
the lobbyist “controls.” (A PAC is a fundraising organization that donates to fed-
eral candidates and is associated with a company, union, or nonprofit organiza-
tion.) Gift-giving to government employees or the members of their household is
prohibited without explicit permission by the House or Senate ethics committee.
Staff who leave government service must wait one or two years (depending on
their level in government) before registering as lobbyists. While the U.S. is con-
sidered the most robust system of any nation, 20 U.S. states have higher scores
than the federal government (Chari et al. 2019), and LaPira and Thomas (2017)
estimate that more than half (52%) of U.S. federal lobbying activity still goes
unregistered, especially lobbying in the executive branch.
    Using the CPI’s quantitative method for assessing the stringency of lobbying
legislation, Keeling et al. (2017) give the UK a significantly lower score than the
U.S., at 33, tying it with Australia and putting it above the European Union (32)
and France (30), among others. A score of 30–60 classifies a system as medium-
robust (Chari et al. 2019). Chari et al. (2019) describe medium-robust regimes
as requiring individual lobbyists to disclose their personal identities, as well as
the issue, bill, or government institution they are lobbying; medium-robust coun-
tries also limit or prohibit lobbyists from giving gifts or contributions to politi-
cians and they require former legislators to observe a cooling-off period between
being a registered lobbyist and working for government. However, none of these
requirements apply in the UK. In Britain, only consultant lobbying firms must
register—not campaigning organizations and not “in-house” lobbyists, even
though the Government estimated that the number of in-house lobbyists—those
who are employed by the businesses and organizations for whom they lobby—
could be six times more than the number who work on contract as lobbying con-
sultants (Cabinet Office 2013). This leaves a significant blindspot in the register.
Further, the names of individual lobbyists are not reported, nor are the targets,
expenditures, or subject matter of lobbying activities. There are no restrictions on
gift-giving or revolving-door employment.
    These limitations challenge the classification of the UK as “medium-robust”
according to the criteria set out by Keeling et al. (2017) which has been reproduced
elsewhere including the second edition of the book Regulating Lobbying (Chari
et al. 2019). In particular, we take issue with Keeling et al.’s (2017) coding of the
UK system in two respects. First, Keeling et al. gave the UK full credit (4 points
under CPI’s scheme) for requiring every lobbyist to register with no minimum
threshold for money spent. In fact, however, UK lobby firms need not register if they
do not have a VAT number, which requires an annual revenue of £85,000 or more.
The CPI gives 0 points if the threshold is higher than $500. Second, Keeling et al.
give the UK credit (3 points) for requiring individual lobbyists to register, when in
fact only consultant lobbying firms must register, not the individuals who work for
the consultancy, nor any in-house lobbyists. CPI gives 0 points if individual lobby-
ists are not required to register. These corrections reduce the UK total score from 33
to 26, and this score moves the UK into the “low robustness” category (Chari et al.
2019). It is now ahead of only two systems that are in effect today—those of the
Netherlands and “the strange case” of Germany (Ronit and Schneider 1998).
Opaque: an empirical evaluation of lobbying transparency…


Creation of a minimalist lobby register

The establishment of an official and mandatory register of lobbying in Britain was
first discussed by the Select Committee on Members’ Interests in 1991, but no meas-
ures were adopted. Twenty years later, Conservative Party Prime Minister David
Cameron called lobbying “the next big scandal waiting to happen” (Porter 2010).
Indeed, in the following 5 years there were 15 lobbying scandals in Britain (Trans-
parency International 2015), with names such as “Cash for Amendments” (2009),
“Cash for Influence” (2010), and “Cash for Questions” (2013). Meanwhile, the
OECD was recommending (2009) to its then 30 member nations that they adopt
greater transparency of government activity, and jurisdictions including Estonia,
Slovenia, Brazil, Canada, Chile, Mexico, and the European Union all considered
creating or strengthening laws that govern lobbying activities.
    Announcing that “Transparency is at the heart of this Government’s agenda,”5
the Conservative–Liberal Democrat coalition Government created in 2014 a man-
datory register of consultant lobbyists. The Transparency of Lobbying, Non-Party
Campaigning and Trade Union Administration Act requires consultant lobbyists
(also known as contract or third-party lobbyists) to register with the Office of the
Registrar of Consultant Lobbyists, overseen by the Cabinet Office. Registered con-
sultant lobbyists must disclose quarterly a list of clients —and that is all. The Gov-
ernment itself estimated that the exclusion of in-house lobbyist from the require-
ment to register would leave 85% of lobbying unreported (Cabinet Office 2013). The
register specifically excludes several types of communication with government offi-
cials from the need for registration, including communication between client organi-
zations and Government, communication with senior civil servants and ministers’
special advisers, and communication with government officials by organizations not
represented by a consultant lobbyist. Violators may be fined but are not subject to
prison time. Lobbyist gift-giving is allowed, and no revolving-door provisions exist.
And although the three British associations that represent lobbyists6 had operated
under a long-standing shared code of conduct, the Government chose not to include
in the statute this code of conduct or any other rules of behavior.
    The House of Common’s Public Administration Select Committee (2009) had
recommended much more stringent regulations, which would have required that
both consultant and in-house lobbyists register; that lobbyists report previously held
public office jobs and that senior public officials disclose their previous private-
sector employment; that details of meetings be disclosed including dates and topics
discussed, if not full minutes; that gifts and hospitality be disclosed; and that com-
pliance be monitored and enforced by a body independent of lobbying organizations
and of the Government. The committee also recommended strengthening the exist-
ing Advisory Committee on Business Appointments, a part-time, unpaid, Cabinet


5
  Tom Brake, debate on floor of the House, 22 January 2014.
6
  The three organizations representing the lobbying profession were the Public Relations and Communi-
cations Association, the Association of Professional Political Consultants, and the Chartered Institute of
Public Relations.
                                                                           A. M. McKay, A. Wozniak


Office committee that advises the Prime Minister on the ethics of proposed appoint-
ments of “revolving-door” government officials as they enter the private sector. Of
these, only the recommendation that registering be mandatory (or lobbyists would
not be allowed to meet with officials), rather than voluntary, was adopted in the law.
   While mandatory registration is a step in the right direction (Kanol 2012), the
Government missed the opportunity to make lobbying regulation more rigorous, as
requested by stakeholders. A total of 259 comments submitted about the proposal
during the consultation period (80 representative bodies and trade associations,
34 civil society organizations, 34 companies, 10 trade unions, 10 research organi-
zations, 9 campaign groups, 78 individuals, 3 regulators, and one Member of Par-
liament; Cabinet Office 2012). Crepaz (2017a) reviewed these and found that 85%
wanted the law to be stricter than proposed. Opposition party members called the
proposal “ridiculously narrow”7 and speculated that it would likely “make lobbying
more opaque, rather than more transparent.”8
   The Government and some who submitted comments argued that further regula-
tions could become burdensome and costly; that publishing financial information in
the register would breach commercial confidentiality; that disclosure of staff lists
from organizations working on high-profile and contentious issues would put indi-
vidual people at risk; that adherence to a further code of conduct would be unpro-
portionate and add additional burden on organizations already subscribing to wider
industry codes; and that it was questionable whether a register would have any sig-
nificant impact on lobbyists’ behavior (Cabinet Office 2012). We think a more plau-
sible explanation is that the Government was more interested in publicly embracing
transparency and accountability than it was in inviting public scrutiny of its private
discussions and decision-making (see also Vargovčíková 2017, who makes a simi-
lar argument regarding attempts at regulating lobbying in Poland and the Czech
Republic).


Difficult‑to‑use data on meetings with government ministers

In pursuit of transparency, and at least somewhat in response to the multiple lob-
bying scandals, in 2010 the Conservative–Liberal Democrat coalition established
in the Ministerial Code a new requirement that British Government departments
disclose quarterly lists of the external groups who met with government ministers.
Each department uploads its own lists in its own format. The name of the organiza-
tion or individual, the quarter in which they met with the minister or permanent
secretary, and the purpose of the meeting must be reported, though the purpose is
often listed as “general discussion” or similarly vague language. No additional infor-
mation is required, though more information exists: minutes are generally kept, and
the meetings are audio-recorded and frequently transcribed. The government argued



7
    Michael Meacher, debate of the Floor of the House, 3 September 2013.
8
    Jon Trickett, debate of the Floor of the House, 9 September 2013.
Opaque: an empirical evaluation of lobbying transparency…


that making available the minutes of meetings between all outside interests and gov-
ernment ministers would be costly and time-consuming.
   Quarterly reports are filed online at www.gov.uk under the heading “transpar-
ency data,” along with tens of thousands of other government documents that might
relate to transparency (e.g., salary disclosure data, hospitality and gifts, departmen-
tal spending). Thus, to get to ministerial meetings data, one has to search manually
using either a keyword search (“meet*”) or by browsing the publication database
by department and time period. While the data are arranged quarterly, they are not
updated nearly as often as every quarter. Further, the published records are dis-
closed in different formats and with varying titles: For our period of analysis from
the first quarter of 2011 up to and including the fourth quarter of 2015 there were
234 PDFs, 700 comma-separated value files, 52 MS Excel worksheets, 23 MS Word
documents, six Open Document spreadsheets, 24 Open Document texts, and six rich
text files. Some reports contained only meetings with external groups, others com-
bined these with gifts, hospitality, and overseas travel reports; some reports sepa-
rately reported meetings of individual ministers or secretaries, others synthesized
all meetings of a department’s senior staff in one document; occasionally data from
more than one quarter were included in a single document. As a result of these chal-
lenges, the meetings data are seldom analyzed (exceptions are Dommett et al. 2017
and Transparency International 2015).9
   Focusing specifically on the evaluation of the usability of transparency data for
member of the public (one of the CPI’s stringency criteria mentioned before), we
follow Piotrowski and Liao (2012), who identify a set of criteria—accuracy, acces-
sibility, completeness, understandability, timeliness, and low cost—which can be
applied to any government transparency data. Following Holman and Luneburg
(2012), we add as another criterion whether the provided data are searchable, so that
comprehensive, comparative, and specially targeted database queries are possible.
We now evaluate the ministerial meetings data according to these usability criteria.

Accuracy (preciseness, factuality) The meetings data offer little information about
the meetings other than the broad “purpose of the meeting.” Among the most com-
monly stated purposes are generic descriptions such as “trade and investment,”
“energy issues,” or “tax matters.” And some are even less precise: More than
2500 entries refer to “general discussions,” another 2500 to “introductory” meet-
ings, 1050 to “catch-up” meetings, around 450 to “regular meetings,” around 250
to “general meetings,” and around 550 to either “routine meeting,” “talk meeting,”
or “roundtable discussion.” In an additional 200 cases, the purpose of the meeting
is not reported at all. A total of 10% of our acquired reports fail to offer any policy-
specific information about what was discussed in any of the meetings listed.




9
  For about a year and a half, a website run by the company Moving Flow consolidated these meetings
data and provided a searchable interface (http://whosl​obbyi​ng.com), but they ceased doing so in Septem-
ber 2011.
                                                                    A. M. McKay, A. Wozniak


   Another problematic aspect is the frequent disclosure of individuals’ names
without any indication of organizational affiliation. In a random sample of 5%
of the groups listed in the meetings data, we identified 53 such cases (5.2%).
Examples include Jacqueline Gold, CEO of the multinational retail company
Ann Summers; Jin Liqun, who was helping the government to establish the Asian
Infrastructure Investment Bank; and Michael Hintze, founder and chief executive
of CQS, a credit asset management firm. While most of these individuals have
some level of prominence, ordinary citizens cannot be expected to recognize their
names and link them to the organizations they represent. The vague descriptions
of the purpose of meetings and the omission of organizations’ names suggest they
are what Piotrowski and Liao (2012) would label “intentional concealment.”

Accessibility Online access to the meetings data is public and open; no registration
is necessary. All files can be accessed via either the general gov.uk website or the
publications section of the individual department websites. All files can be down-
loaded in the format provided by the source. Files provided in the .csv format can
also be previewed in-browser.

Completeness By the middle of 2016, 92.6% of the 877 required quarterly reports
were available for the years 2011–2015. (The “877” is a function of 20 quarters x
44 department positions, minus three quarters during which the office of the Dep-
uty Prime Minister no longer existed.) The data cover only the top two of the three
tiers of government ministers (the Secretaries of State and the Ministers of State;
only the Foreign and Commonwealth Office and the Department for International
Development also consistently reported meetings by their Parliamentary Under-Sec-
retaries of State) plus the top level of the Civil Service (the Permanent Secretaries).
However, the 5000 senior civil servants at the next levels do not have to report their
meetings, nor do Special Advisers to ministers (their political staff). One depart-
ment, Export Finance, had not published any meeting disclosures by mid-2016. The
incomplete data provided and nondisclosure of meetings with other levels of govern-
ment suggest a substantial shortfall in fulfilling Piotrowski and Liao’s (2012) specifi-
cation that “all necessary parts” be published.

Understandability All meetings disclosures are arranged and written in a way that
makes them easily understandable. For the most part, the reports eschew technical
language and the use of uncommon acronyms. Filers could possibly argue that the
use of generic statements of the meetings’ purposes increases their understandabil-
ity for the lay public; however, their lack of accuracy and completeness is better
described as a hindrance to transparency and open government.

Timeliness As mentioned above, our data collection during the third and fourth
quarters of 2016 revealed that 7.4% of quarterly reports from the years 2011 to 2015
were still not available online. Moreover, almost 30% of reports about the first quar-
ter of 2016 and 21% of reports about the fourth quarter of 2015 had not yet been
Opaque: an empirical evaluation of lobbying transparency…


uploaded, which indicates a failure on the part of departments to provide their trans-
parency information in a timely manner.

Free or low cost Apart from acquisition costs and internet access fees, access to
the quarterly meetings reports is free of charge.

Searchability The biggest usability obstacle is the lack of a complete and searcha-
ble database of ministerial meetings with external groups. Meeting reports are found
in the publications database at gov.uk; they do not have their own site. This means
users have to search and sift through a very large database of different document
types to reach the meetings data. To give but one example: a keyword search for
“BAE Systems” Inc., a company that has met with department officials 383 times
between 2011 and 2015, with the filter “transparency data” for publication type at
www.gov.uk/gover​nment​/publi​catio​ns, yields 309 results, including documents
about transactions, departmental spending, and contracts. And users still may not
have a comprehensive set of what is available, since there is no website dedicated to
meetings disclosure. It is also not possible to do a reliable targeted search for either
external groups or Ministers/Secretaries. Considerable time and skill are required to
collect, synthesize, and clean the disparate data.

   Based on these criteria, the usability of the Ministerial Meetings data for citizens
at large can be categorized as low. In Piotrowski and Liao’s four-quadrant typol-
ogy of the relationship between transparency and usability (2012, 86), we would
assign the UK to the “overload” designation “in which government information is
disclosed in large amounts, but without sufficient attention to information usability”
(Piotrowski and Liao 2012, 88).


The mismatch between groups that lobby and groups that meet
with government ministers

Despite their numerous limitations, we now have access to plentiful data about the
names of external groups that are meeting with particular British ministerial offices.
We identified and collected 1045 files containing information about the ministerial
meetings of 23 UK Government departments (including the Offices of the Leaders
of the House of Commons and House of Lords10) from the first quarter of 2011
through the last quarter of 2015.11 In total the files include 72,756 recorded contacts
between a ministerial department senior official and an external organization or indi-
vidual. This is the greatest number of meetings between government officials and



10
   The Offices of the Leader of the House of Commons and the House of Lords constitute ministerial
departments within the Cabinet Office, which is itself a ministerial department of the UK Government.
11
   The Department for Energy and Climate Change became part of the Department for Business, Energy
and Industrial Strategy in July 2016, and the Department for International Trade was established in July
2016.
                                                                                   A. M. McKay, A. Wozniak




Fig. 1  Overlap between groups in the lobby register and groups in the ministerial meetings data in the
UK. Notes: The data describe groups in the lobby register for the seven quarters starting in January of
2015 and groups in the ministerial meetings data for the 5 years from 2011 to 2015. Circles and overlap
are proportional in size to the populations indicated. Our analysis indicates that 44% of lobby clients and
consultants in the lobby register appear in the meetings data, and just 2% of the groups in the meetings
data appear in the lobby register


outside interests that has ever been included in a single data set (in a similar study,
Dommett et al. 2017 retrieve and code 6192 meetings).
   To calculate the number of unique entities with one or more meeting, a sec-
ond data set was created which eliminated all semantic duplicates in the “external
group” column. All acronyms were checked via a Google search, and entries’ desig-
nations in both data sets were changed to the full designation of the group. To also
account for small differences in how organizations were designated (as well as typ-
ing errors), we used the Fuzzy Lookup add-on for MS Excel. All matched pairs with
a matching score higher than 0.90 were checked for congruence and the designation
of all entries referring to the same group—both in the list of organizations and the
original list of all meetings—were standardized in a new variable according to the
designation most commonly used by the group itself. The Fuzzy Lookup procedure
also yielded matches for direct subsidiaries of business conglomerates (e.g., “Voda-
fone UK” and “Vodafone Group”); these were standardized under a single name
(e.g., “Vodafone”). A manual check revealed further duplicates that could not be
detected through semantic criteria; as examples, the “Anglican Church” was merged
with the entry which uses the more commonly used designation “Church of Eng-
land,” the “Government of Singapore Investment Corporation” was merged with the
entry “GSIC Limited,” and “Harrow Council” was merged with the entry “Harrow
London Borough Council.”
Opaque: an empirical evaluation of lobbying transparency…




Fig. 2  Overlap between groups in the lobby register and groups in the ministerial meetings data in 2015.
Notes: Circles and overlap are proportional in size to the populations indicated. The data show that in
2015, 29% of lobby clients and consultants appear in the meetings data, and only about 3% of groups in
the meetings data appear in the lobby register


   Figures 1 and 2 show the overlap between unique groups in the two sets of
data. The light gray shows Type I error in the lobby register—lobbyists’ clients
who have no reported meetings with government ministers. The dark gray shows
Type II error in the register—groups that meet with government officials but are
not included in the register. The overlap is the set of groups that appear in both
sources of data. The two sets of data overlapped temporally in the four quarters
of 2015; as such we provide statistics for the 2015 data alone in Fig. 2, and Fig. 1
presents the full data set—2011–2015 for meetings, and the first quarter of 2015
through the third quarter of 2016 for the register. For both data sets, the starting
date is when the data began and the ending date is a function of when we wrote
the first draft of this paper.


Meetings without lobbyists

Only 2% of groups that we know met with government ministers and permanent
secretaries in the 2011–2015 time frame are listed in the lobby register during the
seven quarters starting in January of 2015. In the shared time frame of the four
quarters of 2015, just less than 4% of groups mentioned in the ministerial meet-
ings data also appear in the register of consultant lobbyists. Counting in terms
of meetings rather than groups, 91% of reported ministerial meetings (and 91%
in 2015 alone) were with groups and individuals whose names do not appear as
                                                                                 A. M. McKay, A. Wozniak


clients in the lobby register. These high numbers were anticipated by the Pub-
lic Relations and Communications Association and openly discussed during the
bill’s debate on the floor of the House.12

Lobbyists that don’t lobby

Our analysis shows that 44% of the 918 clients and 116 consultant lobbying firms13
that are listed in the register in 2015–2016 also appear in the ministerial meetings
data of 2011–2015. Restricting the sample to the 12 months for which we have data
from both sources, Fig. 2 shows that just 250 of the 852 groups that appear in the
register—29%—also appear among the 7303 groups in the meetings data.
   The differences between data from different time periods suggest that lobbyists
may register their clients as a matter of course or routine, while their meetings with
ministers are intermittent and dependent on current events and shifting government
priorities. Or, it may be that lobbying consultants find professional benefits to regis-
tering even if they are not actively communicating about policy with high-level min-
isters, which is an argument lobbyists made before the register was created. Alter-
natively, the issue may be that lobbyists meet most frequently with Special Advisers
and civil servants (Zetter 2008), neither of which publish their meetings. Only offi-
cials in the top two levels of government—ministers, secretaries, and the leaders of
the House of Commons and House of Lords—report their meetings activity, while
lobbyists likely have more meetings with lower-level employees. Thus, there may be
a large number of meetings between government officials and lobbyists that are not
reported—and are not required to be.


The skewed distribution of ministerial meetings across groups

In addition to the many groups that meet with government officials but do not reg-
ister as lobbying organizations, we know very little about the groups that are reg-
istered. This absence matters because registered lobby clients account for a dis-
proportionate number of meetings. In 2015, the 3.4% of groups that appear in the
meetings data that are also lobby clients account for 8.6% of meetings. Across the
5-year period, the average group in the meetings data appears 3–4 times, while the
average lobby client appears in the meetings data 17 times. (In 2015, the average
group meets twice with ministers’ offices while the average lobbying client attends
five meetings.)14 Thus, the lobbying clients listed in the register are groups that the
Government listens to, or at least meets with, especially frequently (Fig. 3).
   Even if we disregard the lobby clients, the meetings data are distributed une-
qually. As seen in Table 1, 15 of the 25 most active lobby groups seen in the


12
   Graham Allen, debate of the Floor of the House, 9 September 2013.
13
   We estimate that less than 1 percent of the meetings listed were with registered lobby consultancies.
14
   These numbers are means; the medians are 1 and 6 for the whole period of the data and 1 and 2 for
2015 alone.
Opaque: an empirical evaluation of lobbying transparency…




Fig. 3  Groups that met with UK Government departments from 2011 to 2015: distribution by number of
meetings


ministerial meetings data are not listed as lobbying clients in the register. These
include umbrella business associations, such as the Confederation of British Indus-
try and the British Chambers of Commerce, as well as companies with household
names, such as the BT Group (formerly British Telecom), Shell, BP (British Petro-
leum), and Rolls-Royce, which together attended 960 meetings with government
ministers in the 5 years between 2011 and 2015. The two-thirds of groups listed
in the meetings data that attend just one meeting account for 20% of the meetings.
Meanwhile, the 10% most frequent visitors account for 60% of all meetings with
department officials, and the 1% most frequent visitors are present at 27% of the
meetings. Among groups that meet with ministers that are also listed in the regis-
ter, the top decile of most frequent visitors accounts for 64% of the meetings (45%
in 2015 alone), and the top 1% are present at 14% of all meetings with department
officials (8% in 2015 alone). This uneven distribution is evidence that some lobby-
ists have far greater access than others (also see Dommett et al. 2017). Yet users of
the two data sets know nothing about the identities of these lobbyists, what measures
they are lobbying about, or how much money may be involved.


Discussion

Why did the UK Government choose not to adopt stricter lobbying regulations
in 2014? Let us examine the Government’s stated reasons. First, the Government
argued that additional requirements would be too costly and burdensome. We think
it would not be costly or burdensome, and might even reduce the cost and burden,
if ministers’ offices were given a common form, format, or online portal for report-
ing meetings. It would also not be costly and burdensome to the Government to ask
consultant lobbyists to supply, in addition to the names of their clients, the names
                                                                                        A. M. McKay, A. Wozniak


Table 1  External groups that met most frequently with UK ministerial government departments, 2011–
2015 (excluding media outlets)
Rank         Group                                  Type                                           Number of
                                                                                                   meetings

1            Confederation of British Industry      Business association (all business types)      608
2            BAE ­Systemsa                          Firm (aerospace, defense, security)            384
3            BT Group                               Firm (telecom)                                 313
4            Barclaysa                              Firm (banking and financial services)          274
5            Shell                                  Firm (oil and gas)                             270
5            Local Government Association           Organization of local authorities              270
7            Federation of Small Businesses         Business association                           268
8            HSBC                                   Firm (banking and financial services)          247
9            Royal Bank of Scotland                 Firm (banking and financial services)          245
10           Lloyds ­Banka                          Firm (banking and financial services)          212
11           British Chambers of Commerce           Business association (all business types)      201
12           Association of British ­Insurersa      Business association (insurance)               200
13           Pricewaterhouse ­Coopersa              Firm (professional services)                   198
14           BP (British Petroleum)                 Firm (oil and gas)                             193
15           Trades Union Congress                  Trade union federation                         188
16           National Farmers Union                 Trade union                                    185
17           Rolls-Royce                            Firm (aerospace, defense, energy)              184
18           Network ­Raila                         “Arms-length public body”                      179
19           GlaxoSmithKlinea                       Firm (pharmaceuticals)                         174
20           EDF ­Energya                           Firm (energy)                                  170
21           Centricaa                              Firm (energy)                                  163
22           KPMGa                                  Firm (professional services)                   162
23           British Retail Consortium              Business association (retail)                  161
24           Tesco PLC                              Firm (groceries)                               150
25           EEF Manufacturers Organisation         Business association                           147
a
    These groups also appear as clients in the consultant lobbyist register


or offices of their lobbying targets as well as the subjects on which they were lob-
bying. Second, the Government claimed that greater disclosure of lobbying prac-
tices could lead to competitive advantages and disadvantages for registered lobby-
ists—but even if true, this would not affect Government, only lobbyists. Third, the
government argued that the purpose of the register was simply to complement the
meetings data that was already being published because “it remains unclear exactly
whose interests are being represented when consultant lobbyists meet with govern-
ment” (Cabinet Office 2013). But this disclosure was both unnecessary and unful-
filled: Our data show that lobby firms account for less than 1% of external groups
in the meetings data and less than 1% of meetings. In fact, consultants named in the
2015 data were mentioned in the meetings data only five times before the 2014 law
was adopted. Across the 5-year period, by our count, the meetings data include the
names of 31 known consultant lobbyists, while the same data contain 431 registered
Opaque: an empirical evaluation of lobbying transparency…


lobby clients. Moreover, even in those relatively few cases in which a consultant
firm is mentioned as having met with a government minister’s office, we still do not
know on whose behalf the consultant lobbyist was working, since the register shows
that firms represent 8–9 clients on average. So, the explanation that the purpose of
the register was to identify the clients of lobbyists’ meeting with departments does
not hold water. In summary, we find that none of the Government’s arguments for
its minimalist register withstand close scrutiny, especially given the significant and
growing number of other jurisdictions that now regulate lobbying around the world.
    Crepaz (2017a) argues that the UK regulation is yet another example of how right-
leaning political parties in government share an ideological preference for low-regu-
lation lobbying. Crepaz concludes that lobbying scandals had only an “agenda-setting
effect” on the UK’s lobbying law. We think that, while the Government may well
have had an ideological commitment to “light touch” governance, the main reasons
the Conservative–Liberal Democrat coalition Government created a lobby register
were to respond to criticism and to prevent future lobbying scandals. Less charitably,
the objective might also have been to obscure the fact that ministers and their offices
spend about 60% of their external group meetings with the 10% of groups that visit
most frequently, and that they spend 27% of their meetings with the most frequently
visiting 1% of groups. This fact is consistent with the idea that politicians across Gov-
ernments are cross-pressured to demonstrate a commitment to public accountability
while keeping much of their decision-making processes private.


Conclusions

The late Grant Jordan contended that an examination of lobbying is essential to
understanding contemporary British politics (1991, vii), and lobbying in Britain
is considered by some to be “the most developed” in Western Europe (Miller and
Dinan 2008). Yet the centrality of lobbying in the UK is belied by the inadequate
rules governing disclosure of lobbying activities.
   We make four critiques of the UK government’s transparency efforts regarding lob-
bying. First, the 5-year-old lobby register misses the majority of lobbying that occurs
in London, especially lobbying by those firms and campaigning organizations that
lobby on their own behalf. The names, targets, and expenditures of lobbyists are not
reported, let alone the subject matter being discussed, and there are no limitations on
gift-giving or revolving-door employment. Our corrected application of the criteria of
the U.S. Center for Public Integrity, as also used by Keeling et al. (2017) and Chari
et al. (2019), puts the UK as among the least robust of lobbying regulation regimes.
   Second, the Government’s published data about ministers’ meetings with outside
groups, which were touted as an effort toward transparency, are almost totally unusable
as provided. Applying the criteria for the usability of government information laid out
by Piotrowski and Liao (2012), with the addition of Holman and Luneburg’s (2012)
searchability criterion, we conclude that the usability of the meetings data is low.
   Third, there is very little overlap between the two sets of data. Our analysis of
more than 72,000 meetings reported by government departments shows that the
lobby register contains less than 4% of the organizations that we know met with
                                                                                           A. M. McKay, A. Wozniak


government ministries. Conversely, data about ministerial meetings data contain no
records of meetings with as many as 70% of the clients we know contracted with
professional lobbying firms.
   Fourth, we note a tremendous skew in the distribution of ministers’ meetings with
lobby groups. The majority of meetings are held with just 10% of the groups, and
more than a quarter of meetings are with just 1% of groups. This skew may be the
kind of private information that the Government does not wish to make public.
   The inadequacy of the lobby register and the meetings data, combined with the
Government’s conscious decision not to adopt stricter regulations, call into question
the transparency to which the Coalition Government said it was dedicated. Worse,
these lapses make it easy for firms and special interests in the UK to manipulate the
policy process out of the public eye. As a result, researchers, journalists, and the
public do not know whether or to what extent outside groups are taking advantage of
this opportunity to work in relative secrecy—and we cannot find out using the data
available.


Funding Funding was provided by Economic and Social Research Council (GB) (Grant No. 102907R).

Open Access This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License,
which permits use, sharing, adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long as
you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Creative Com-
mons licence, and indicate if changes were made. The images or other third party material in this article
are included in the article’s Creative Commons licence, unless indicated otherwise in a credit line to the
material. If material is not included in the article’s Creative Commons licence and your intended use is
not permitted by statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain permission
directly from the copyright holder. To view a copy of this licence, visit http://creat​iveco​mmons​.org/licen​
ses/by/4.0/.



References
Allen, David W. 2002. Corruption, Scandal, and the Political Economy of Adopting Lobbying Policies:
     An Exploratory Assessment. Public Integrity 4(1): 13–42.
Cabinet Office. 2012. A Summary of Responses to the Cabinet Office’s Consultation Document ‘Intro-
     ducing a Statutory Register of Lobbyists.’ Presented to Parliament by the Minister for Government
     Policy. July.
Cabinet Office. 2013. Impact Statement. A Statutory Registry of Lobbyists (as part of the Transparency
     Lobbying, Non-Party Campaigning and Trade Union Administration Bill). 9 July.
Center for Public Integrity. 2003. Methodology. The Center for Public Integrity. Updated 19 May 2014.
     Available at https​://publi​cinte​grity​.org/state​-polit​ics/influ​ence/hired​-guns/metho​dolog​y-5/. Last vis-
     ited 21 October 2019.
Chari, Raj, John Hogan, Gary Murphy, and Michele Crepaz. 2019. Regulating Lobbying: A Global Com-
     parison, 2nd ed. Manchester: Manchester University Press.
Crepaz, Michele. 2017a. Investigating the Introduction and the Robustness of Lobbying Laws. PhD The-
     sis, Trinity College Dublin, Department of Political Science.
Crepaz, Michele. 2017b. Why Do We Have Lobbying Rules? Investigating the Introduction of Lobbying
     Laws in EU and OECD Member States. Interest Groups & Advocacy 6(3): 231–252.
Dommett, Katharine, Andrew Hindmoor, and Matthew Wood. 2017. Who Meets Whom: Access and
     Lobbying During the Coalition Years. The British Journal of Politics and International Relations
     19(2): 389–407.
Opaque: an empirical evaluation of lobbying transparency…


Graham, Erin R., Charles R. Shipan, and Craig Volden. 2013. The Diffusion of Policy Diffusion Research
     in Political Science. British Journal of Political Science 43: 673–701.
Holman, Craig, and William Luneburg. 2012. Lobbying and Transparency: A Comparative Analysis of
     Regulatory Reform. Interest Groups & Advocacy 1(1): 75–104.
House of Commons Public Administration Select Committee. 2009. Lobbying: Access and Influence in
     Whitehall. London: The Stationery Office.
Jordan, Grant. 1991. The Commercial Lobbyists: Politics for Profit in Britain. Aberdeen: Aberdeen Uni-
     versity Press.
Jordan, Grant. 1998. Towards Regulation in the UK: From ‘General Good Sense’ to ‘Formalised Rules’.
     Parliamentary Affairs 51: 524–537.
Kanol, Direnc. 2012. Should the European Commission Enact a Mandatory Lobby Register? Journal of
     Contemporary European Research 8(4): 519–529.
Keeling, Sean, Sharon Feeney, and John Hogan. 2017. Transparency! Transparency? Comparing the New
     Lobbying Legislation in Ireland and the UK. Interest Groups & Advocacy 6(2): 121–142.
LaPira, Timothy M., and Herschel F. Thomas. 2017. Revolving Door Lobbying: Public Service, Private
     Influence, and the Unequal Representation of Interests, 2017. Lawrence, KS: University Press of
     Kansas.
McGrath, Conor. 2009. Access, Influence and Accountability: Regulating Lobbying in the UK. In Interest
     Groups and Lobbying in Europe: Essays on Trade, Environment, Legislation, and Economic Devel-
     opment, ed. Conor McGrath, 53–123. Lampeter: Edwin Mellen Press.
Miller, David, and William Dinan. 2008. Corridors of Power: Lobbying in the UK. Observatoire de la
     société Britannique 6: 25–45.
Newmark, Adam J. 2005. Measuring State Legislative Lobbying Regulation, 1990–2003. State Politics &
     Policy Quarterly 5: 182–191.
Opheim, Cynthia. 1991. Explaining the Differences in State Lobby Regulation. Western Political Quar-
     terly 44: 405–421.
Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development. 2009. Lobbyists, Governments and Public
     Trust, Volume 1: Increasing Transparency Through Legislation. Paris: OECD Publishing.
Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development. 2014. Lobbyists, Governments and Public
     Trust, Volume 3: Implementing the OECD Principles for Transparency and Integrity in Lobbying.
     Paris: OECD Publishing.
Ozymy, Joshua. 2013. Keepin’ on the Sunny Side: Scandals, Organized Interests, and the Passage of Leg-
     islative Lobbying Laws in the American States. American Politics Research 41(1): 3–23.
Pegg, David. 2015. “Lobbying Register Covers Fewer than One in 20 Lobbyists—Report.” The Guard-
     ian, 21 September 2015.
Piotrowski, Suzanne, and Yuguo Liao. 2012. The Usability of Government Information: The Necessary
     Link Between Transparency and Participation. In The State of Citizen Participation in America, ed.
     Hindy Lauer Schachter and Kaifeng Yang, 75–98. Charlotte: Information Age Publishing.
Porter, Andrew. 2010. David Cameron Warns Lobbying is Next Political Scandal. London: The Tele-
     graph. 8 February 2010.
Radaelli, Claudio M. 2000. Policy Transfer in the European Union: Institutional Isomorphism as a Source
     of Legitimacy. Governance 13: 25–43.
Ronit, Karsten, and Volker Schneider. 1998. The Strange Case of Regulating Lobbying in Germany. Par-
     liamentary Affairs 51: 559–567.
Transparency International. 2015. Accountable Influence: Bringing Lobbying Out of the Shadows. Lon-
     don: Transparency International UK.
Vargovčíková, Jana. 2017. Inside Lobbying Regulation in Poland and the Czech Republic: Negotiating
     Public and Private Actors’ Roles in Governance. Interest Groups & Advocacy 6(3): 253–271.
World Wide Web Foundation. 2016. Open Data Barometer Global Report, 3rd ed. Washington, DC:
     World Wide Web Foundation. Retrieved April 20, 2017 (http://opend​ataba​romet​er.org/doc/3rdEd​
     ition​/ODB-3rdEd​ition​-Globa​lRepo​rt.pdf).
Zetter, Lionel. 2008. Lobbying: The Art of Political Persuasion. Petersfield: Harriman House.

Publisher’s Note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published
maps and institutional affiliations.
