opensecrets.org
State Lobbying Disclosure: A
Scorecard
15–19 minutes
— By Dan Auble and Brendan Glavin, June 28, 2022
This scorecard is part of OpenSecrets’ Layers of Lobbying series
examining federal and state lobbying trends. Reports in the series
include Layers of Lobbying: An examination of 2021 state and
federal lobbying from K Street to Main Street and Layers of
Lobbying: Federal and state lobbying trends in spending,
representation and messaging.
Introduction
In 2021, OpenSecrets tracked over $1.8 billion in lobbying
spending at the state level — a substantial sum of money spent at
state capitals across the country in an effort to inﬂuence policy and
legislation. But this only represents a portion of the total amount
spent in the state level lobbying arena since many states’
disclosure laws do not require a full accounting of the money spent
to inﬂuence legislators and executives, preventing the public from
knowing the full extent of this spending.
OpenSecrets’ database includes lobbyist and client registration
data for all 50 states, but only 19 of the 50 states make meaningful
State Lobbying Disclosure: A Scorecard • OpenSecrets
about:reader?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.opensecrets.org%2Fnews%2...
1 of 11
4/22/26, 11:27
data available on lobbying spending. The remaining states do not
require sufﬁcient disclosure of lobbying activity in a way that
makes it possible to include them in a comparable manner to the
19 states that provide fuller disclosure.
This is the most signiﬁcant discrepancy between state lobbying
disclosure laws, but not the only area where differences and gaps
exist. Using a scorecard format, OpenSecrets has analyzed
lobbying disclosure rules state by state in order to show where
they stand against each other. The report compares each state
with a focus on four key areas of disclosure that affect the ability of
the public to know key facts about lobbying in their states. They
include:
1. 1. Who is lobbying and who is paying for it? A fundamental
starting point revolves around who the actors are. Although the
speciﬁc terms used may differ from state to state to some extent,
for the purposes of this report the terms lobbyist and client will be
used. A lobbyist is an individual paid by a client to represent the
client’s interests at the state legislative or gubernatorial level. How
states collect data on who the lobbyists and clients are, as well as
the connection between individual lobbyists and the clients they
serve is an important consideration.
All states collect this information, although the manner is not
uniform. For this scorecard, the baseline practice is identiﬁcation of
both lobbyist and client. States that separate registrations for
lobbyists and clients, as opposed to the practice of lobbyists
registering and including the names of their clients within, are
scored higher. This is based on the premise that separate
registrations provide for cleaner data collection and easier public
dissemination of the information.
State Lobbying Disclosure: A Scorecard • OpenSecrets
about:reader?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.opensecrets.org%2Fnews%2...
2 of 11
4/22/26, 11:27
For example, Oklahoma’s guidance states that "lobbyists should
communicate between themselves to ensure each lobbyist
registers the principal [client] using the same information and to
determine which lobbyist will pay the registration fee for the
principal." Providing reliable and consistent information to the
public is not achieved by asking reporting parties to talk amongst
themselves before ﬁling reports. Multiple lobbyists being
responsible for providing client data often results in inaccuracies,
whereas a system that requires the client to register independently
means the data is being provided from a single source — the
client. A separate client registration could also allow regulators to
request more in-depth information about the client than might be
known by or available to the lobbyist, as the lobbyist will likely only
have information pertinent to their speciﬁc contract.
2. 2. How much are lobbyists getting paid? Compensation is the
term most often used to refer to the amount a client pays a
lobbyist. While that seems like a simple concept, it can be the
most challenging aspect of tracking lobbying spending at the state
level. Seventeen states do not require compensation paid to
lobbyists be disclosed at all. Seven more states only require partial
reporting with compensation either reported in ranges or not linked
to individual lobbyists.
This is the key factor in OpenSecrets’ ability to collect and display
data on state lobbying spending. If a state lacks this requirement,
its data can’t be accurately compared to other states that do. To
put this in context, of the over $1.8 billion in spending
OpenSecrets tracked in 2021, 84% of that spending was from
compensation.
3. 3. Is there timely disclosure? The timing of reports is a
State Lobbying Disclosure: A Scorecard • OpenSecrets
about:reader?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.opensecrets.org%2Fnews%2...
3 of 11
4/22/26, 11:27
straightforward but important piece of any disclosure regime.
Delayed disclosure hampers the ability of the public to have useful
information on lobbying activity while legislative action is in
process. This varies from state to state, some requiring monthly
reports and others as few as once a year.
In our scoring system, the baseline for timely disclosure is set to
monthly reporting when the legislature is in session, and quarterly
otherwise. This is a standard that 20 states are already using
some variation of.
4. 4. How easily can the public access disclosed information? All
states maintain some web presence that allows members of the
public to have access to information about lobbying, but the quality
of those sites and availability of the data within them varies greatly.
This report focuses on three key facets of those sites: 1) Is there a
user friendly search feature? 2) Does the site provide easily
accessible lists of registered lobbyists and clients? and 3) Is the
disclosed data available for download?
Each of these factors is considered a best practice for public
availability and are combined to determine a total public availability
score for each state.
There was a time when just having a search feature would have
been considered a best practice, but now nearly all states have
them and the way some search features are structured can even
make it harder for people to retrieve this public information. A
search is not particularly helpful if it is buried behind several click
throughs, ﬁlled with jargon that only makes sense to insiders or
requires prior knowledge to perform the search.
Since many of the search systems require users to know the name
of a lobbyist or client, easily accessible lists of lobbyists and clients
State Lobbying Disclosure: A Scorecard • OpenSecrets
about:reader?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.opensecrets.org%2Fnews%2...
4 of 11
4/22/26, 11:27
are often a necessity to a functional lobbying transparency site.
Lastly, downloadable data is not just a tool for data geeks, but a
valuable asset that allows anyone searching for lobbyist data to
capture that information. Some common instances where no
downloads can impede functionality include when searches do not
produce a unique url, forcing users to redo the search each time
they want to see the data. Searches that produce results that
present over many pages also make it difﬁcult to compare and sort
the data.
State vs. Federal Lobbying Disclosure
Although the focus of this report is on state lobbying disclosure,
federal lobbying provides important context to inﬂuence peddling in
the states. OpenSecrets has federal lobbying data reported under
the Lobbying Disclosure Act going back to 1998. In 2021,
OpenSecrets tracked $3.8 billion in reported federal lobbying
spending.
Here are a few important points to compare the state lobbying
discussed in this report with federal requirements for lobbying
disclosure:
• Organizations that make or spend money lobbying must ﬁle
reports with the House and Senate disclosure ofﬁces by
approximately three weeks after the close of a calendar quarter.
Lobbying ﬁrms ﬁle a report for each client. Companies and other
organizations that have in-house lobbying operations also ﬁle their
own disclosures.
• Lobbying ﬁrms must ﬁle an initial registration within 30 days of
contracting with a new client or deciding to lobby for a new client.
State Lobbying Disclosure: A Scorecard • OpenSecrets
about:reader?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.opensecrets.org%2Fnews%2...
5 of 11
4/22/26, 11:27
Information about who is spending the money, who is doing the
lobbying, issues they plan to lobby, which parts of the government
they plan to contact and which individuals will do the work are all
disclosed.
• Quarterly reports include a total spending ﬁgure and are organized
by general issue area chosen from a standard list. Under each
issue area, a more detailed description of speciﬁc topics lobbied
includes bill numbers and titles for any legislation lobbied. This
additional text can range from detailed descriptions of which
section of a bill was lobbied to vague terms like “U.S.-China
relations.”
• Within each issue area, ﬁlers also report which parts of the federal
government were contacted, such as the Department of Energy,
Federal Aviation Authority, White House or Senate.
• Within each issue area, ﬁlers list lobbyists and also report any
previous employment those individuals may have had with the
federal government.
While federal lobbying disclosure is relatively robust, especially
when compared to the states, it has some shortcomings, the most
glaring of which is the loose deﬁnition of an individual lobbyist,
which can be interpreted in ways to keep inﬂuence operatives off
the rolls and spur the proliferation of so-called “shadow lobbying”
by unregistered operatives. Research has found that the number
of people working in government relations jobs may be at least
double what is reported in ofﬁcial lobbying ﬁlings. OpenSecrets’
research has similarly (and repeatedly) found that about half of
former lobbyists who stop reporting lobbying each year remain in
jobs related to government relations, often for the same employer.
State Lobbying Disclosure: A Scorecard • OpenSecrets
about:reader?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.opensecrets.org%2Fnews%2...
6 of 11
4/22/26, 11:27
Rankings
Lobbying disclosure scores for each state, with breakdowns for
different disclosure areas can be seen in the map below. Darker
states are the top scorers, and the lighter states are those that did
more poorly in the assessment. Hovering over any state will
provide details on each state’s score. The complete list is available
here.
Each of the four key areas discussed above was graded on a ﬁve-
point scale. For lobbying/client disclosure, the baseline score was
three and states that require separate registrations for the
lobbyists and clients were assigned a four. For compensation and
timely reporting, a score of four was assigned to those states that
are at least requiring the baseline practices discussed above and a
score of ﬁve for those that are exceeding the baseline. States with
scores that fall below the baseline receive a score between zero
and three, depending on the individual circumstances. For
instance, states that do not require disclosure of compensation
received a score of zero for that category. As detailed earlier,
several states have partial compensation disclosure. Those
received scores of between one and three in relation to the level of
compensation disclosed.
The categories related to public availability of the disclosed data
are more subjective and can have gray areas. Within the ﬁve
points allocated to this category, one point is dedicated to the
availability of lobbyist and client lists. Partial points were assigned
based on lists that are available, but not as easily accessed. Two
points each were assigned to user-friendly search and availability
of downloadable data.
State Lobbying Disclosure: A Scorecard • OpenSecrets
about:reader?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.opensecrets.org%2Fnews%2...
7 of 11
4/22/26, 11:27
The two deﬁning characteristics of all the top-scoring states (16
and up) is that they each require compensation to be reported and
they make that information available to the public in an accessible
way. All of these states are tracked in the OpenSecrets database.
What further sets apart the states at the top of the list is that they
also had perfect scores in timely disclosure, requiring monthly
reports throughout the year and user friendly transparency sites.
For example, Washington state’s site allows easy navigation
between categories, auto-populates lists which can be ﬁltered and
has a clear link to download results at any time.
Unsurprisingly, nearly all of the poorest scoring states, those that
scored less than 10 total, received a zero for the fact that
compensation reporting is not required. These states also tended
to have poor scores in the other categories. The bottom two
states, North and South Dakota, only require reporting once a
year. Additionally, each also scored poorly on ease of search,
download ability and availability of lobbyist/client lists.
Only one state in the group of states that scored the worst group,
Virginia, does require compensation disclosure. But, it does such a
poor job of making that information available to the public its
overall score in the bottom group of states. While the ofﬁcial
Virginia outlet for lobbying information is not up to par, the Virginia
Public Access Project, an independent non-proﬁt group, has ﬁlled
some of the gaps by providing data not available on the ofﬁcial
website.
Conclusions
This scorecard, while not comprehensive, clearly shows that many
states are falling short when it comes to providing meaningful
State Lobbying Disclosure: A Scorecard • OpenSecrets
about:reader?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.opensecrets.org%2Fnews%2...
8 of 11
4/22/26, 11:27
disclosure of lobbying activities. But it also shows that some states
are successfully requiring meaningful disclosure in ways that can
be informative for other states.
First and foremost, the failure to make lobbyist compensation
reportable at all in 17 states is the number one roadblock to fuller
disclosure in those states, and to being able to see the full picture
of lobbying across the country. Having this nationwide picture is
not just an exercise in counting dollars spent. Two recent reports
by OpenSecrets have shown that lobbying activities are not just
standalone efforts in speciﬁc jurisdictions, but an increasingly
concerted effort by national players organizing lobbying activities
across state and federal jurisdictions.
Some states may be reluctant to adopt such reporting, but the fact
that 26 states require full compensation disclosure, seven have
partial disclosure and it is required at the federal level, shows that
it is not unreasonable to require. In fact, it could be argued that this
is the benchmark.
Other potential changes in state disclosure, while not as profound
as the missing compensation issues, do have the ability to make a
difference in the public’s knowledge of lobbying activity.
• Easily accessible lists of lobbyists and clients. Many state
sites link to lists of lobbyists and clients from their lobbying
disclosure site home pages. It should be a best practice for all
states.
• Frequency of reporting. Filing between 2 and 4 times a year is
the most common schedule for lobbyists and clients across the
states. But 16 states do require some form of monthly reporting,
often tied to the legislative session, enabling a more timely release
State Lobbying Disclosure: A Scorecard • OpenSecrets
about:reader?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.opensecrets.org%2Fnews%2...
9 of 11
4/22/26, 11:27
of information to the public.
• Prioritize user-friendly transparency websites. With technology,
simple changes can go a long way toward making a site more
available to the general public and not just a place for insiders to
keep tabs on what their colleagues are up to. 
• Don’t hide search functionality behind multiple click throughs and/
or menus.
• Replace technical terms, legalese and jargon in search functions
with common sense language
• Auto-populate lists on search pages. In some states, if you want to
get a list of lobbyists a user has to do an “empty” search to get the
list. This means the user must, through trial and error, see what
happens if they don’t enter any text and hit search.
• Provide data downloads. Providing a download option for search
results has long been a common practice on websites and should
be standard for these types of transparency sites.
For OpenSecrets, this report operates as a jumping off point for
future endeavors working on state lobbying disclosure. We intend
to use the information gathered here to expand upon our work and
shed further light on issues within this space.
This report does not cover all areas of state lobbying disclosure.
Disclosure of targeted legislation is something not addressed in
this report that is ripe for further examination as most states do not
address it at all under the current rules and regulations.
Additionally, we aim to expand outreach efforts to data users and
agency staff in an effort to develop common frameworks for
deﬁnitions and requirements that are sensible to implement across
State Lobbying Disclosure: A Scorecard • OpenSecrets
about:reader?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.opensecrets.org%2Fnews%2...
10 of 11
4/22/26, 11:27
jurisdictions.
This scorecard is part of a series examining the intersection of
state and federal lobbying spending funded in part by Omidyar
Network.
Return to our list of all OpenSecrets reports.
State Lobbying Disclosure: A Scorecard • OpenSecrets
about:reader?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.opensecrets.org%2Fnews%2...
11 of 11
4/22/26, 11:27
