EXPLAINING THE DIFFERENCES IN
STATE LOBBY REGULATION
CYNTHIA OPHEIM
Southwest Texas State University
he 
most straightforward measure of legislative independence
from interest group pressure is the rigor of the state’s formal
JL regulation of lobbyists. State registration and reporting require-
ments for lobbyists were cited by the Citizen Conference on State Leg-
islatures (CCSL) as important criteria for both legislative indepen-
dence and accountability (CCSL 1971b: 96, 97, 129, 130). The extent
to which legislators resist inordinate interest group pressure is undoubt-
edly influenced by a whole host of factors, many of them intangible.
However, the legislature’s formal adoption of laws regulating lobbies
and the oversight structure put into place to enforce these laws are
important indicators of the institutional desire for independence. The
CCSL maintains that &dquo;the very least that legislatures must do to estab-
lish their independence of undue influence-both in substance and in
the eyes of the public-is make certain that lobbyists operate out in
the open, where the press and public can see them&dquo; (CCSL 1971b:
129).
The adoption of lobby regulation laws in the states has been a
lengthy and gradual process; the first law was passed by Massachu-
setts in 1890. Addressing charges of corruption, over half the states in
the 1960s and 1970s introduced lobby registration and reporting require-
ments. Today lobbyists must register in all states-with the secretary
of state, the clerk of the house or secretary of the senate, or with a
special commission. In all but five states, lobbyists must file reports
periodically, and in four-fifths of the states they must report expendi-
tures (Rosenthal 1981: 117). In addition, more stringent lobby regu-
lation reforms have been introduced at the federal level and in several
state legislatures.
State legislatures and agencies charged with enforcement of lobby-
ing regulations have traditionally been notorious for their neglect of
both oversight and enforcement. This neglect has been precipitated by
Received: December 6, 1989
Revision Received: March 28, 1990
Accepted for Publication: April 3, 1990
 at NANYANG TECH UNIV LIBRARY on June 8, 2015
prq.sagepub.com
Downloaded from 
406
both budget and staff restrictions and by the unwillingness of state
legislatures and agency officials to delve into the sensitive waters of
lobbying activity (Huckshorn 1985). These days many states are increas-
ing their efforts to monitor lobbying activities and punish violators.
Thirty-eight states have independent ethics agencies with varying degrees
of enforcement authority, and most of these agencies are charged with
enforcement of lobby registration and disclosure.
Beyond the minimum requirement for registration and periodic
reporting, states vary widely on how stringently they regulate lobbies.
While several theories have been offered to explain this variance, none
has been tested conclusively. The CCSL argues that increased profes-
sionalism in state legislatures will increase the latter’s capacity and
willingness to regulate organized groups. Professional legislatures, those
with higher pay, longer time in session, and adequate staff support,
are less dependent on lobbies for information; they also possess the
institutional resources necessary for more stringent regulation.
In addition to professionalism, there is reason to believe that dif-
ferences in political culture may also account for the variance in state
lobby regulation laws. Kincaid argues that culture is &dquo;logically prior&dquo;
to socioeconomic and political structural variables because it defines
the values that are merely reflected by economic and political struc-
tures (Kincaid 1980). Past research shows that political culture is asso-
ciated with differences in the formal structures of state governments
and state policy outcomes (Herzik 1985; Karnig and Sigelman 1975).
Both Nice and Peters and Welch link the incidence of political corrup-
tion with political culture; lower levels of political corruption are per-
ceived and found in states with &dquo;moralistic&dquo; subcultures (Nice 1983;
Peters and Welch 1978). Despite these findings, no specific link between
political culture and regulation of lobbies has been established.
The research presented here examines what factors account for the
stringency of a state’s lobby regulation laws and enforcement proce-
dures. Using a multiple regression model, the researcher tests the pre-
dictive value of structural variables, that is, measures of legislative
professionalism, as well as cultural, economic, and political variables
that might help to explain differences in the rigor of state lobby regu-
lation efforts. The results of a multiple regression analysis give us the
effect of each variable on regulation of lobbies while taking all the
others into consideration.
 at NANYANG TECH UNIV LIBRARY on June 8, 2015
prq.sagepub.com
Downloaded from 
407
MEASURING KEY CONCEPTS
An Index of Lobby Regulation
To measure the stringency with which states regulate organized
lobbies, an index of lobby regulation was created as the dependent
variable. The index consisted of 22 separately scored items drawn
from three different dimensions of lobby regulation requirements. 
1
These three dimensions were: (1) statutory definition of a lobbyist
(seven items); (2) frequency and quality of disclosure (eight items);
and (3) oversight and enforcement of regulations (seven items). Each
dimension is critical to the state’s efforts to regulate special interest
activity. The legal definition of lobbyist delineates who is required to
register and disclose information. The frequency of reporting and quan-
tity of information contribute to the quality of disclosure. The former
ensures that information is updated periodically while the latter requires
more or less specificity. The oversight and enforcement structure indi-
cates the seriousness of the state’s intentions to enforce its regulations.
Statutory definitions of lobbyists vary in their inclusiveness. Only
two states - Arkansas and Illinois which have no statutory designation
of lobbyists - fail to include &dquo;legislative&dquo; lobbying as a criterion for def-
inition. By contrast, thirty states fail to include &dquo;administrative&dquo; lob-
bying as a criterion. Seven states designate &dquo;elective officials&dquo; as lobby-
ists while seven others designate &dquo;public employees.&dquo; In addition, some
states include specific compensation, expenditure, and time standards
to delineate lobbying activity. The seven criteria for definition of lob-
byists were each coded 1 if a criterion was included in the state’s def-
inition of lobbyists and 0 if it was not.
The frequency with which states require lobbyists to report ranges
from monthly, both in and out of the session, to annually. Five states -
Arkansas, Georgia, Louisiana, Utah, and Wyoming- require no peri-
odic reporting. Frequency of reporting was coded dichotomously to
reflect the most extreme differences in frequency. States which require
reports to be filed monthly during the session or both in and out of
session were coded 1, while states which require reports quarterly,
semi-annually, or annually were coded 0. Information disclosed in
1 All data, with the exception of frequency of reporting requirements, were coded
from the Council of State Government’s Blue Book 1988-89, Campaign Finance,
Ethics and Lobby Law: Special Edition (Lexington, Ky.: Council of State Govern-
ments, 1988). Data indicating frequency of reporting requirements were taken
from Council of State Governments, The Book of the States, 1988-89.
 at NANYANG TECH UNIV LIBRARY on June 8, 2015
prq.sagepub.com
Downloaded from 
408
these reports includes the lobbyist’s total spending, spending by cate-
gory, expenditures benefitting public employees including gifts, legis-
lation approved or opposed by the lobbyist, sources of income, total
income, and other activities that might constitute influence peddling
or conflict of interest. These seven categories were each coded dichot-
omously depending on whether the state required they be reported.
States also vary a great deal on their willingness to monitor lobby
regulation and their capacity to enforce violations. Some state agencies
or commissions charged with reviewing lobby reports perform this
function more extensively than others with a regular review of all
reports. In some states only randomly selected reports or reports about
which complaints have been filed are reviewed. Thus the thoroughness
of reviews was coded (1 for review of all reports, 0 for less extensive
review).
The seriousness of the state’s enforcement of lobby regulation
depends, in large part, on the prosecutorial authority of the agency or
commission charged with regulating lobbyists. Six items measure the
rigor of this authority. These items include whether the agency may
subpoena witnesses, subpoena records, conduct administrative hear-
ings, impose administrative fines, impose administrative penalties, or
file independent court actions. For all of these items, states were coded
1 if the agency possessed this authority and 0 if it did not.
The sum of all 22 items indicated the state’s index score. For 20 of
the items, a dichotomous coding scheme is the obvious procedure; for
two items - frequency of reporting and thoroughness of reviews - some
finer distinction is lost in the simple 0/1 coding procedure. However,
following Herzik’s example, by sampling different items within gen-
eral categories, the basic concepts embodied in each of the three cate-
gories are tapped by several specific variables. Dichotomous coding
also eliminates much of the arbitrariness in attempting to create finer
distinctions in the coding of each of the two variables (Herzik 1985:
417). Table 1 shows index rankings for the forty-seven states for which
data were available.
Legislative Professionalism
In almost twenty years since the CCSL evaluated the decision-
making capabilities of state legislatures, we have seen a progressive
change from the &dquo;citizen&dquo; legislature to the &dquo;professional&dquo; legislature.
For example, we are witnessing longer and more frequent sessions.
Legislators are receiving higher salaries with more substantial bene-
 at NANYANG TECH UNIV LIBRARY on June 8, 2015
prq.sagepub.com
Downloaded from 
409
TABLE 1
STATES RANKED BY STRINGENCY OF STATE LOBBYING REGULATION
(0 - weakest / 18 - strongest)* 
*
*Data for Montana, South Dakota, and Virginia were unavailable.
fits. Staff support is increasing in both quantity and quality, and leg-
islative staffers are becoming more personalized and more specialized
(Lattimer 1985). Computers and modern information systems are now
routinely part of the state legislative process.
Many of these changes or &dquo;reforms&dquo; were called for by the CCSL
study (CCSL 1971a). The explicit goal of the reforms was to encour-
age more informed, more deliberative, and more independent legisla-
tures. Legislators would now have adequate time to consider measures
before them. Salary increases would keep good people. Specialized
and personalized staffers would help legislators more competently han-
dle increasing amounts of legislation and more conscientiously service
 at NANYANG TECH UNIV LIBRARY on June 8, 2015
prq.sagepub.com
Downloaded from 
410
constituents. All this meant increased legislative independence from
executives who would now be forced to share their power.
But independence from the executive branch was not the only goal
of professionalization. Legislatures were to become more z’independent
from special interest groups as well. The notion that part-time, amateur
legislatures are more dependent on organized lobbies takes various
forms. One is that amateur legislators face an &dquo;information gap&dquo; that
forces them to rely chiefly on full-time lobbyists for expertise and
advice (Maxwell and Crain 1984; Bell and Price 1984). More time to
deliberate and better staff support narrows this gap (Patterson 1976).
The CCSL adamantly argues that &dquo; ... the surest and quickest way
to reduce the influence of special interest lobbyists upon our legisla-
tures is to raise the level of competence in those legislatures to the
point where they can compete with lobbyists on even terms on behalf
of the citizens&dquo; (CCSL 1971b).
Another form of this argument holds that poorly paid legislators
are more susceptible to pressures from powerful economic interests
whom they are hesitant to regulate. Increasing his or her personal
income helps isolate the legislator from these pressures (Bell and Price
1987). Increasing a legislator’s pay may help him to eliminate or resist
gifts or &dquo;perks&dquo; from lobbyists. Indeed, in some states, lobby reform
has been tied to increases in legislative salaries. As with the U.S.
House, longer sessions and higher pay increase the possibility of leg-
islative service as a career. As careerism develops, tenure inevitably
increases (Squire 1988). Generally harder to beat, legislators possess
the job security necessary to focus more on policy questions and less
on politics (Paterson 1987).
Are professional legislatures less dependent on interest groups
as the CCSL claims? If this is true, one would expect regulation of
organized lobbies to be more rigorous in states with professional
legislatures.
Professionalism has been operationalized both as an index (Grumm
1971; Carmines 1974; Morehouse 1981), and by using separate indi-
cators (Squire 1988). The three most common components used to
measure this concept are: (1) the level of compensation; (2) the time
spent performing legislative duties; and (3) the level of personal and
professional staff support.2 
2
2 Recent scholars have criticized the fuzzy or imprecise conceptualization of legislative
professionalism. See LeLoup 1978; Roeder 1979; Bowman and Kearney 1988. In
 at NANYANG TECH UNIV LIBRARY on June 8, 2015
prq.sagepub.com
Downloaded from 
411
The level of salary and benefits is a major factor determining
whether a legislator can make legislative service a full-time career
(Francis and Baker, 1986). Compensation is a complicated matter
with some states paying on an annual basis, while others compensate
on a per diem rate. In the latter case, calendar days are used in some
states and legislative days in others. Furthermore, the states vary in
providing additional compensation through unvouchered expense
accounts, travel reimbursements, and insurance and retirement bene-
fits. The measure used in this study is the minimum amount of money
paid to legislators, that is, annual base salary plus per diem given in
regular sessions.3
The second component of professionalization is the time that a leg-
islator spends performing legislative responsibilities. Hence, legislative
pay and time on the job defines a &dquo;career&dquo; legislator. The measure of
time used here is the average amount of time spent annually in regular
session. Using Council of State Governments data, the average dura-
tion of the regular session of each state was calculated for 1986-87 (pp.
116-17). Data list actual adjournment dates rather than formal session
limitations and, therefore, is a better measure of actual time in ses-
sion. The mean was 146 days.
The third component of professionalism is staff support. Reform-
ers argue that professional staff saves time for legislators, improves
constituent services, and -can improve decision-making by providing
unbiased information (Advisory Commission on Intergovernmental Rela-
tions 1985). Clark found that better staffing did not necessarily result
in &dquo;better legislation,&dquo; but it did result in increased attention to partic-
ular policy areas (Clark 1978). It is, therefore, logical to assume that
the level of staff support will affect the stringency with which states
monitor and enforce lobby regulations.
There are several resources that measure staff support, but the
most recent is the Council of Government’s data (p. 122). Staff ser-
vices range from 0, no full-time, shared, or district staff to 5, all three
types of staffers. This measure was applied to staff resources in both
the lower and upper houses; the range for staff services was 0 to 10. To
redetermining the measure of legislative capability, Bowman and Kearney per-
formed factor analysis on a number of variables in addition to compensation,
session length, and staff support. However, the variance explained by these three
variables was consistently as much as three times higher than variables in other
factors.
3 These data are gathered from Council of State Governments, 1988, pp. 97-99.
 at NANYANG TECH UNIV LIBRARY on June 8, 2015
prq.sagepub.com
Downloaded from 
412
check the reliability of this indicator, Simon’s measure of staff support
was coded similarly (Simon 1979). Correlation between the two mea-
sures was significant (r =.63).
Correlation among the three measures of professionalism yielded a
very high correlation between pay and length of session (r =.83). In
order to avoid the problem of multicolinearity, these two variables
were combined to form an index. This was done by multiplying the
two measures together. To correct the skewness which results from this
multiplicative approach, a square root transformation was performed.
Thus only two variables were used to measure professionalism: (1)
level of staff support and; (2) the index combining measures for pay
and length of session.
Political Culture
Daniel Elazar’s concept of political subcultures in the American
states has proven useful in predicting formal government structures,
political behavior, and policy outcomes. Indeed, Karnig and Seligman
found that political culture had more impact on a state’s policy out-
comes than levels of professionalism (Karnig and Sigelman 1975).
Herzik found culture to be a powerful predictor of &dquo;openness of gov-
ernment structures and political processes,&dquo; while Fitzpatrick and Hero
established a statistically significant relationship between states with
moralistic cultures and the use of merit systems (Herzik 1985; Fitzpatrick
and Hero 1988).
Other studies have established a particularly strong link between
political culture and the political attitudes and behavior of political
leaders and activists as compared to those of the general public (Joslyn
1980; Welch and Peters 1980; Lowery and Sigelman 1982). There is
also evidence that states with moralistic cultures are less tolerant of
political corruption, have lower rates of federal conviction for corrup-
tion, and are more likely to initiate reforms to discourage political cor-
ruption than other states (Ritt 1974; Peters and Welch 1978; Kincaid
1980; Nice 1983).
Elazar’s description of traditionalistic, individualistic, and moral-
istic political cultures is employed here (Elazar 1984). The notion of
political culture is an historical phenomenon; these three subcultures
emerged from interactions between the differences and similarities
among ethnic and religious groups as they developed over time. In
&dquo;traditionalistic&dquo; political cultures, the goal of the political system is
one of maintaining the existing order. There is low inter-party com-
 at NANYANG TECH UNIV LIBRARY on June 8, 2015
prq.sagepub.com
Downloaded from 
413
petition, and policies and actions are determined primarily by an elite.
In an &dquo;individualistic&dquo; political culture, the political arena is viewed as
a market place for ideas and actions. Political life is based on a system
of mutual obligations rooted in personal relationships; political success
depends on maintaining one’s status in the system of mutual obliga-
tions. Party competition is strong and professional politicians are an
active force. In contrast, the goal of the moralistic political culture is
to achieve the broadest good for the community with or without public
pressure. Party competition is strong, but the common citizen, rather
than the professional politician, is viewed as the primary political
actor.
One would expect the stringency of state lobbying laws to be most
strongly associated with moralistic political cultures and most weakly
associated with traditionalistic. These cultures reflect the most and
least concern for the common good respectively. Individualistic cul-
tures would fall somewhere in between. While emphasis on the pur-
suit of individual goals discourages interest group regulation in indi-
vidualistic cultures, strong competitive parties responding to public
demand might encourage it. To measure these dominant cultural ori-
entations, Ira Sharkansky’s operationalization of Elazar’s state-by-state
summaries was used (Sharkansky 1969).4
Socioeconomic Indicators: Economic Resources and Urbanization
A number of studies have concluded that state policy outputs are
essentially a response to a state’s level of economic resources (Dye
1966; DeLeon 1973). Wealthier states are able to direct resources
toward increased public expenditures for a variety of policies; they
also tend to be more innovative in attempting to resolve social prob-
lems (Walker 1969). Since most of these studies show that wealthier
states are more willing to establish broad-based redistributive policies,
we might also expect wealthier states to be more assertive in their reg-
ulation of narrowly organized interests. Allen and Clark (1981) dem-
4 Sharkansky’s measures were reversed, so that on a scale of nine, one is traditional-
istic and nine is moralistic. This was to standardize the positive direction of the
independent variables in my model. Sharkansky’s nine-point scale has been crit-
icized on the grounds it takes three conceptual dimensions and puts them into a
single scale. However, the scale is an appropriate predictive variable for this
study because the rankings reflect the expected level of state regulatory effort.
That is, I assume moralistic states lead the other two in stringency of lobby reg-
ulation, with the individualistic states rank second, followed by the traditionalis-
tic states. Alaska and Hawaii were not included in Sharkansky’s measures.
 at NANYANG TECH UNIV LIBRARY on June 8, 2015
prq.sagepub.com
Downloaded from 
414
onstrate that wealthier states were the first to adopt lobby regulation;
they speculate that a certain level of economic growth may produce
lobbying activity and lobby tactics that in turn prompt regulative
response.
The indicator of economic resources used here is the states’ per
capita tax capacity (ACIR 1985: 12). Tax capacity is the dollar amount
of revenue that each state would raise if they applied a nationally uni-
form set of tax rates to commonly used set of tax bases. Because the
same tax rates are used for every state, estimated revenue yields vary
only because of differences in the underlying bases. Hence tax capac-
ity provides a measure of the hypothetical ability of a state to raise
revenues.
In addition to a state’s economic resources, one might also expect
urbanization to explain the need or willingness of a state to regulate
lobbyists. Urbanization is regarded as an indicator of social complex-
ity and mobilization; both conditions might yield a greater need for
laws to manage the lobbying pressures that result. In addition, the
incidence of corruption is likely to be higher in an urban state prompt-
ing calls for regulatory action in an environment that is already accus-
tomed to more pervasive government.
Party Competition
Most scholars regard parties and interest groups as rivals. Strong
parties are better able to control the entry of pressures into state gov-
ernment and are generally able to prevail over the policy-making pro-
cess. In weak party states, major interest groups tend to control policy
&dquo;because there is no party to synthesize their demands&dquo; (Morehouse
1981: 118). Thus one might expect states with stronger and more
competitive parties to regulate lobbyists more stringently. The mea-
sure employed here is Ranney’s &dquo;index of interparty competition,&dquo;
which is based upon gubernatorial elections and state legislative seats
from the years 1974-1980. The measures are folded so that higher
values indicate higher levels of completion (Ranney 1976).5 
5
5
 This research employs the updated version of Ranney’s index used by John F. Bibby,
Cornelius P. Potter, James L. Gibson, and Robert J. Huckshorn, "Parties in
State Politics," in Herbert Jacob and Kenneth Vines, Politics in the American States,
4th ed., pp. 65-67.
 at NANYANG TECH UNIV LIBRARY on June 8, 2015
prq.sagepub.com
Downloaded from 
415
ANALYSIS
Regression or the method of ordinary least squares (OLS) was per-
formed to test whether the dependent variable (index of lobby regula-
tion) is a function of the independent variables (legislative profession-
alism, political culture, socio-economic indicators, and party
competition). Correlations among independent variables were figured
to guard against the possibility of multicolinearity.
As Table 2 shows, the predictive capacity of the multivariate model
is highly significant. The F-test for the model is 8.84, significant at the
p <.0001 
level. The R2 indicates that the model explains a very respect-
able 58 percent of the variance in the stringency of state lobby regu-
lation. Partial regression coefficients (b’s) for each of the independent
variables show that the most significant contributors to the model are
political culture, level of legislative staff support, and party competi-
tion. Indeed, culture, with a t-Value of 4.85 (p <.0001) 
seems to
account for much of the model’s explanatory power, although staff and
party competition are both significant below p <.05. 
Party competi-
tion, however, is the only variable negatively associated with lobby
regulation.
Table 3 indicates that our model significantly explains the variance
in all three categories of the lobby regulation index: definitions of lob-
bying, frequency and quality of disclosure, and oversight and enforce-
TABLE 2
MULTIPLE REGRESSION BETWEEN LOBBY REGULATION INDEX(Y) AND
STAFF RESOURCES (Xl), INDEX FOR PAY AND SESSION LENGTH (X2),
POLITICAL CULTURE (X3), TAX CAPACITY (X4), URBANIZATION (X4),
AND PARTY COMPETITION (X5)
 at NANYANG TECH UNIV LIBRARY on June 8, 2015
prq.sagepub.com
Downloaded from 
416
TABLE 3
MULTIPLE REGRESSION BETWEEN THE THREE CATEGORIES OF LOBBY REGULATION (Y)
AND STAFF RESOURCES (Xl), INDEX FOR PAY AND SESSION LENGTH (X2),
POLITICAL CULTURE (X3), TAX CAPACITY (X4), URBANIZATION (X5),
AND PARTY COMPETITION (X5)
ment of regulations. However, there are differences in the contribu-
tions of variables in each category. While political culture is significant
in all three models, level of staff support is significant in categories one
 at NANYANG TECH UNIV LIBRARY on June 8, 2015
prq.sagepub.com
Downloaded from 
417
and two, definition of lobbying and frequency and quality of disclo-
sure. Category three, which indicates a state’s willingness to oversee
and enforce regulations, is most significantly predicted by higher pay,
longer sessions, and, to a lesser extent, level of party competition, in
addition to political culture. Again, party competition is negatively
associated with enforcement, but it is not significant at p <.05 
in any
of the three categories.
DISCUSSION
These results indicate that political culture, legislative staff sup-
port, higher legislative salaries, longer sessions, and party competition
are important predictors of the stringency of state lobby regulation.
The long-term historical influences of culture are particularly useful in
this regard. Moralistic states are more likely to adopt rigorous regula-
tions that formally govern the influence-peddling activities of lobby-
ists. While these formal regulations do not insure disclosure and enforce-
ment in all cases, they are the first and most fundamental step in
checking the power and influence of special interest lobbies. Through
stringent lobbying laws, moralistic states formally express a desire to
protect the interests of a broader constituency. Conversely, legislators
in traditionalistic or individualistic political cultures are less likely to
challenge the role of traditional elites or narrowly organized interests.
Although linked to different categories of regulation, we can con-
clude that the traits which characterize professional legislatures - more
staff, higher levels of pay, and longer sessions-predict the legislature’s
inclination to regulate organized lobbies. This finding supports the
CCSL’s argument that raising the level of competence of state legisla-
tures will allow them to compete with lobbyists on behalf of citizens.
Legislators with professional staff assistance may rely less on lobbyists
for advice or expertise. In other words, the growth of professional staff
narrows the &dquo;information gap&dquo; between legislatures and professional
lobbyists. Legislative staffers are also likely to keep legislators informed
about the activity of lobbies including activities which threaten ethical
boundaries. They may also assist legislators to devise appropriate
regulatory policies although their influence on enforcement seems
negligible.
While two measures of legislative professionalism - session length
and compensation-do not have significant bearing on the state’s
definition of lobbying or the frequency and quality of states’ lobby
 at NANYANG TECH UNIV LIBRARY on June 8, 2015
prq.sagepub.com
Downloaded from 
418
disclosure, they are tied to the stringency of oversight and enforce-
ment. Professional &dquo;career&dquo; legislatures see that lobby reports are
reviewed more frequently and are more likely to give administrative
agencies prosecutorial authority. These legislatures express a more seri-
ous intent to enforce lobby regulation.
Although unexpected, there are several possible explanations for
the negative association between party competition and lobby regula-
tion in the full multivariate model. States with one-party systems may
have competing factions that serve in the same capacity as parties to
check the activity of lobbies. States with less competitive party systems
will generally have more dominant interest groups. In the latter case,
regulation of organized lobbies may be the result of increases in real
or perceived lobby abuses. Since there is likely to be less emphasis on
issues and more emphasis on personality in states dominated by inter-
est groups, the incidences of corruption in these states may be more
visible.
As more and more state legislatures address the issue of ethics,
questions surrounding the relationship of legislators and lobbyists will
continue to be raised. Certainly a state’s political culture is an impor-
tant contextual factor in determining that state’s willingness to guard
the public interest. Beyond that, a legislature’s institutional capacity -
a capacity developed by the professionalization of the legislature-
contribute to its ability to establish appropriate regulatory measures
and rigorous enforcement procedures.
REFERENCES
Advisory Commission on Intergovernmental Relations. 1986. State Fiscal Capac-
ity and Effort. Washington, DC.
&mdash;. 1985. The Question of State Government Capacity. Washington, DC.
Allen, Russ, and Jill Clark. 1981. "State Policy Adoption and Innovation:
Lobbying and Education." State and Local Government Review 13 (January):
18-25.
Bell, Charles G., and Charles M. Price. 1984. "Effects of Professionalization:
Cinderella or Frankenstein?" In David C. Saffell, State Politics, pp. 162-66.
Reading, MA: Addison-Wesley.
&mdash;. 1987. "Twenty Years of a Full-time Legislature: Is It Time for Reform?"
California Journal 18 (January): 36-40.
Bowman, Ann O’M. , and Richard C. Kearney. 1988. "Dimensions of State
Government Capability." Western Political Quarterly, 41 (June): 341-62.
Carmines, Edward G. 1974. "The Mediating Influence of State Legislatures
on the Linkage Between Interparty Competition and Welfare Policies."
American Political Science Review 68 (September): 1118-24.
 at NANYANG TECH UNIV LIBRARY on June 8, 2015
prq.sagepub.com
Downloaded from 
419
Citizen Conference on State Legislatures. 1971a. State Legislatures: An Evalua-
tion of Their Effectiveness. New York: Praeger.
&mdash;. 1971b. The Sometime Governments. New York: Bantam Books.
Clark, Gary J. 1978. Staffing State Legislatures: Lessons from the Model Committee
Staff Project. Washington, DC: The Graduate School, Georgetown Uni-
versity.
Council of State Governments. (1988). The Book of the States, 1988-89. Lexington,
KY.: Council of State Governments.
DeLeon, Richard E. 1973. "Politics, Economic Surplus and Redistribution in
the American States: A Test of a Theory." American Journal of Political Sci-
ence (November): 781-96.
Dye, Thomas R. 1966. Politics, Economics, and the Public: Policy Outcomes in the
American States. Chicago: Rand McNally.
Elazar, Daniel J. 1984. American Federalism: A View From the States, 3rd ed.
New York: Harper and Row.
Fitzpatrick, Jody L., And Rodney E. Hero. 1988. "Political Culture and
Political Characteristics of the American States: A Consideration of Some
Old and New Questions." Western Political Quarterly 41 (March): 145-53.
Francis, Wayne L. 1985. "Costs and Benefits of Legislative Service in the
American States." American Journal of Political Science 29 (August): 626-42.
&mdash;., and John R. Baker. 1986. "Why Do U.S. State Legislators Vacate
Their Seats?" Legislative Studies Quarterly 11 (February): 119-26.
Grumm, John G. 1971. "The Effects of Legislative Structure on Legislative
Performance." In Richard Hofferbert and Ira Sharkansky, eds., State and
Urban Politics, pp. 298-322. Boston: Little, Brown.
Herzik, Eric B. 1985. "The Legal-Formal Structuring of State Politics: A
Cultural Explanation." Western Political Quarterly 38 (September): 413-23.
Huckshorn, Robert J. 1985. "Who Gave It? Who Got It?: The Enforcement
of Campaign Finance Laws in the States." Journal of Politics 47 (August):
773-89.
Jeffe, Sherry Bebitch. 1987. "For Legislative Staff, Policy Takes a Back Seat
to Politics." California Journal 18 (January): 42-45.
Joslyn, Richard. 1980. "Manifestations of Elazar’s Political Subcultures."
Publius 10 (Spring): 37-58.
Karnig, Albert K., and Lee Sigelman. 1975. "State Legislative Reform and
Public Policy: Another Look." Western Political Quarterly 28 (September):
548-52.
Kincaid, John. 1980. "Political Cultures of the American Compound Republic."
Publius 10 (Spring): 1-15.
Lattimer, John N. 1985. "The Changing Role of Legislative Staff in the
American State Legislature." State and Local Government Review 17 (Fall):
244-50.
Leloup, Lance T. 1978. "Reassessing the Mediating Impact of Legislative
Capability." American Political Science Review 72 (June): 616-21.
Loomis, Burdett A. 1985. "Legislative Management: Emerging Reality or a
Contradiction in Terms." State and Local Government Review 17 (Fall): 241-43.
 at NANYANG TECH UNIV LIBRARY on June 8, 2015
prq.sagepub.com
Downloaded from 
420
Lowery, David, and Lee Sigelman. 1982. "Political Culture and State Public
Policy: The Missing Link." Western Political Quarterly 35: 376-84.
Maxwell, William Earl., and Ernest Crain. 1984. Texas Politics Today. St.
Paul: West.
Morehouse, Sarah McCally. 1981. State Politics, Parties and Policy. New York:
Holt, Rinehart and Winston.
Nice, David C. 1985. "Political Corruption in the American States." American
Politics Quarterly 11 (October): 507-17.
Paterson, Andrea. 1987. Is the Citizen Legislature Becoming Extinct?" In
Thad L. Beyle, ed., State Government: CQ’s Guide to Current Issues and Activ-
ities, 1987-88, pp. 75-78. Washington, D.C.: Congressional Quarterly.
Patterson, Samuel C. 1976. "American State Legislature and Public Policy."
In Herbert Jacob and Kenneth N. Vines, Politics in the American States, 3rd
ed., pp. 139-95. Boston: Little, Brown.
Peters, John G., and Susan Welch. 1978. "Politics, Corruption, and Political
Culture: A View From the State Legislature." American Politics Quarterly 6
(July): 345-56.
Ranney, Austin. 1976. "Parties in State Politics." In Herbert Jacob and Kenneth
N. Vines, eds., Politics in the American States, 3rd ed., p. 55. Boston: Little,
Brown.
Ritt, Leonard G. 1974. "Political Cultures and Political Reform: A Research
Note." Publius 4 (Winter): 127-33.
&mdash;. 1973. "State Legislative Reform: Does It Matter?" American Politics
Quarterly 1 (October): 499-510.
Roeder, Phillip W. 1979. "State Legislative Reform: Determinants and Pol-
icy Consequences." American Politics Quarterly 7 (January): 51-70.
Rosenthal, Alan. 1981. Legislative Life: People, Process, and Performance in the
States. New York: Harper and Row.
&mdash;. 1987. "The New Legislature: Better or Worse and for Whom?" In
Thad L. Beyle, ed., State Government: CQ’s Guide to Current Issues and Activ-
ities 1987-88, pp. 69-70. Washington, DC: Congressional Quarterly.
Shaffer, William R., and Ronald E. Weber. 1974. Policy Responsiveness in the
American States. Beverly Hills: Sage.
Sharkansky, Ira. 1969. "The Utility of Elazar’s Political Culture: A Research
Note." Polity 2 (Fall): 66-83.
Simon, Lucinda S. 1979. A Legislators Guide to Staffing Patterns. Denver: National
Conference on State Legislatures.
Squire, Peverill. 1988. "Career Opportunities and Membership Stability in
Legislatures." Legislative Studies Quarterly 13 (February): 65-82.
Uslander, Eric M. 1977. Patterns of Decision Making in State Legislatures. New
York: Praeger.
Walker, Jack L. 1969. "The Diffusion of Innovations Among the American
States." American Political Science Review 63 (September): 880-89.
Weberg, Brian. 1987. "Competitive Legislature Seek Stronger, Specialized
Staffs." In Thad L. Beyle, ed., State Government: CQ’s Guide to Current
Issues and Activities 1987-88, pp. 71-72. Washington, DC: Congressional
Quarterly.
 at NANYANG TECH UNIV LIBRARY on June 8, 2015
prq.sagepub.com
Downloaded from 
421
Welch, Susan, and John G. Peters. 1980. "State Political Culture and the
Attitudes of State Senators." Publius 10 (Spring): 59-67.
Wiggins, Charles W., and William P. Browne. 1982. "Interest Groups and
Public Policy Within a State Legislative Setting." Polity 14 (Spring): 548-58.
Zeigler, Harmon L. 1983. "Interest Groups in the State." In Virginia Gray,
Herbert Jacob, and Kenneth Vines, eds., Politics in the American States, 4th
ed., pp. 97-132. Boston: Little, Brown.
 at NANYANG TECH UNIV LIBRARY on June 8, 2015
prq.sagepub.com
Downloaded from 
