State-Level 
Lobbying and
T axpayers:  How Much Do  
We Really Know?
by Jason Clemens, Julie Kaszton,
Karrie Rufer, and Laura Sucheski

State-Level Lobbying and Taxpayers: How Much Do We Really Know?
Assessing State Lobbying Disclosure Laws and Accessibility
by Jason Clemens, Julie Kaszton, Karrie Rufer, and Laura Sucheski
March 2010
Pacific Research Institute 
One Embarcadero Center, Suite 350 
San Francisco, CA 94111 
Tel: 415-989-0833/ 800-276-7600 
Fax: 415-989-2411 
Email: info@pacificresearch.org
www.pacificresearch.org
Download copies of this study at www.pacificresearch.org.
Nothing contained in this report is to be construed as necessarily reflecting the views of the Pacific 
Research Institute or as an attempt to thwart or aid the passage of any legislation.
©2010 Pacific Research Institute. All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced, 
stored in a retrieval system, or transmitted in any form or by any means, electronic, mechanical,  
photocopy, recording, or otherwise, without prior written consent of the publisher.

CONTENTS
Acknowledgements 
Executive Summary ................................................................................................................................ 7
Introduction....... .................................................................................................................................... 13
I. Background and Context ................................................................................................................... 15
 Defining Lobbying .................................................................................................................................15
 Organized Political Lobbying .................................................................................................................15
 Competition Between Interest Groups ..................................................................................................16
 Taxpayer-Funded Lobbying ...................................................................................................................17
 Existing Research .................................................................................................................................18
II. Why We Should Care About Taxpayer-Funded Lobbying: California as a Case Study ................... 24
 State Lobbying by Category ..................................................................................................................24
 Complicating Matters – Understanding the Definitions ........................................................................27
 Taxpayer-Funded Lobbying in California Restated ................................................................................31
 California in a Federal Context ..............................................................................................................32
III. Assessing State Disclosure Laws and Accessibility ...................................................................... 34
 Introduction ...........................................................................................................................................34
 Methodology .........................................................................................................................................34
 Lobbying-Law Disclosure – A State-by-State Analysis .........................................................................35
  State Disclosure Law Criteria ......................................................................................................35
  Results of Analysis ......................................................................................................................39
 Accessibility ..........................................................................................................................................43
  State Lobbying Information Accessibility Criteria ........................................................................43
       Results of Analysis ......................................................................................................................44
 Comparison of Accessibility Scores with Disclosure-Law Scores ........................................................47
IV. Conclusion and Recommendations ................................................................................................. 50
Endnotes
About the Authors
Statement of Research Quality
About PRI



ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
The authors would like to thank all those involved in this research project for both their support and patience 
as the researchers worked through numerous unanticipated data and methodological challenges. 
The authors would like to thank Timothy A. Wolfe, Chief Executive Officer of QueryLogic Corporation,  
who did an enormous amount of preliminary and exploratory work on this project over the course of 2007  
and 2008. The authors would like to make special mention of the contributions and assistance provided by  
Dr. Benjamin Zycher throughout the research process.
We would like to thank all the state officials who responded to our request for confirmation of our analysis of 
state lobbying disclosure laws and accessibility. We understand the many constraints faced by these individuals 
and appreciate their willingness to assist us in this project.
Our thanks go out to professor Randy Simmons of Utah State University and to Niels Veldhuis, director of 
fiscal studies at The Fraser Institute (Canada), for their reviews of both preliminary and final drafts of this 
study, as well as to professor Clive S. Thomas of the University of Alaska who reviewed the final draft. We also 
appreciate the comments provided by professor Edward Lopez of San Jose State University, professor Adam J. 
Newmark of Appalachian State University, and Benjamin Barr, formerly of the Goldwater Institute (Arizona), 
for their comments on proposed analytical frameworks. 
We would also like to express our thanks to Lance Izumi, senior director of education studies at the Pacific 
Research Institute for his review of education-related lobbying data in California. The various comments and 
suggestions he provided proved invaluable throughout this research project. Any remaining errors or omissions 
are the sole responsibility of the authors. As the authors of this study have worked independently, their views 
and conclusions do not necessarily represent those of the board, supporters, or staff of PRI.



7
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
From the American founding to the present day, people have worried about the influence of interest groups, or 
factions, on the country and on its politics. One of the main fears is that small but organized interest groups 
can secure large benefits through the polity and impose the costs on the larger population. Indeed, many worry 
about the sacrificing of the majority for the interests of a small but powerful minority. For a number of compli-
cated and intertwined reasons, the public’s anxiety about the influence of special interests has increased over the 
last few years. This study aims to advance our understanding of interest groups and their influence.
State of Research
There is broad and well developed research on private-sector interest groups and their associated lobbying 
however there is a disconcerting lack of research on government-financed or what has been called taxpayer-
funded lobbying, conducted by public-sector groups. This is a critical oversight, given the stark differences 
between the private and public sectors. 
An established body of research confirms that private-sector lobbying faces a number of constraints that act 
as disciplining mechanisms on their activities. Competition between private-sector lobbyists, for example, 
imposes discipline. In addition, private- sector organizations have limited resources, and must show results 
to their supporters. These market-based constraints, which result in a self-reinforcing discipline on political 
participants, simply do not exist, or at the very least are muted, when taxpayers fund the lobbying. These stark 
differences require a better understanding of taxpayer-funded lobbying, a central aim of this study, if we are to 
comprehend lobbying and interest groups more broadly. 
It’s Not Just the Federal Government
Lobbying of government does not simply occur at the federal level, where 
a great deal of information and transparency exist. The same is not true of 
lobbying at the state level. As state and local governments have expanded 
over recent decades, their importance in the total mix of government 
spending and regulatory activity has increased. This has launched a flurry 
of lobbying activity in state capitals. Thus, a second goal of the study is 
to further our understanding of lobbying at the state level. The approach 
is to conjoin the two issues by examining lobbying at the state level with 
particular attention to taxpayer-funded lobbying.
How Widespread is Taxpayer-Funded Lobbying in the States . . .
California served as a case study to examine the extent of taxpayer-funded lobbying at the state level. Without 
any adjustments to the state-provided data, Government lobbying, which includes municipalities, counties, 
As state and local  
governments have  
expanded over recent 
decades, their  
importance in the total 
mix of government  
spending and regulatory 
activity has increased. 

8
regional authorities (including transportation, waste management, water, and recreation), and state and regional 
commissions, constituted 16.8 percent of the total lobbying in California in 2007 and 2008 ($92.6 of $552.6 
million).
Our goal of determining and analyzing the extent of taxpayer-funded lobbying requires us to go beyond the 
definitions provided by the state. The central issue is the source of funds used by organizations in lobbying. 
If the resources are ultimately provided or secured by the government, then it is correctly defined as taxpayer-
funded. Thus, portions of additional lobbying categorized by the state as Education, Public Employees, and Labor 
Unions also need to be analyzed to ascertain the extent of taxpayer-funded lobbying.
The analysis and subsequent reclassification of some of the lobbying categorized within these three areas  
results in a more pronounced dominance for Government and related taxpayer-funded lobbying in California 
as a portion of the total. The revised Government and related taxpayer-funded lobbying totaled $131.4 
million in 2007 and 2008, representing nearly one quarter (23.8 percent) or one in every four dollars of  
lobbying in California in 2007 and 2008. Alternatively, the bottom 12 categories (19 in total) of lobbying con-
stituted nearly the same, 25.9 percent, as the single Government category. In California, these figures confirm 
that government lobbying of government (taxpayer-funded) is a dominant source of lobbying at the state level. 
. . . Compared to the Federal Government?
State-level taxpayer-funded lobbying comes into perspective when compared to other types of lobbying. It is 
also important to gauge the magnitude of taxpayer-funded lobbying at the state level compared to the federal 
level. According to federal data, a total of $3.3 billion was spent on lobbying in 2008. One of the categories, 
Civil Servants and Public Officials, is close to the state-level definition used in California for Government. This 
proximity in definitions allows us to compare the magnitude of government lobbying at the state level with 
government lobbying at the federal level.
According to the Center for Responsive Politics, a total of $84.2 million in lobbying spending in 2008 was 
classified as Civil Servants and Public Officials, of which $20.7 million, or nearly one-quarter of the entire 
amount, was based in California. More surprising, however, is how the $20.7 million spent by California-based 
taxpayer-funded organizations on the federal government compares to similar expenditures at the state level. 
The total lobbying spending by Government (before adjustments for other taxpayer-funded lobbying) in Cali-
fornia for state-level lobbying was $50.1 million in 2008. This means that government-to-government lobby-
ing at the state level is at least two-and-a-half times that of government-to-government lobbying at the federal 
level. In other words, taxpayer-funded lobbying of the federal government by California organizations is a little 
more than 40 percent of the spending on lobbying by taxpayer-funded groups in California at the state level. 
The State of State-Level Lobbying Disclosure Laws
One of the major undertakings of the study was to evaluate the state of lobbying disclosure laws at the state 
level across all 50 states. We created a set of 37 criteria relating to different aspects of lobbying disclosure laws 
and applied those criteria to each of the state’s laws and regulations governing lobbying disclosure.

9
Overall, Montana received the highest score of 31 out of a possible 37, or 83.8 percent. By this analysis, Mon-
tana was deemed to maintain the best set of lobbying disclosure laws among the 50 states relative to the 37 cri-
teria used. Other high-performing (ranked) states were Arizona (81.1 percent), South Carolina (78.4 percent), 
Texas (78.4 percent), and Indiana (75.7 percent).
A total of 11 states received scores below 50 percent, indicating a rather poor set of lobbying disclosure laws. 
Perhaps more worrying for those concerned about disclosure was that the average score was 21.9 out of 37, or 
59.3 percent, indicating room for improvement across almost every state.
West Virginia and Nevada shared the dubious distinction of ranking last in the country with a score of 11 out 
of 37, or 29.7 percent. Other low-ranking (poorly performing) states included New Hampshire (32.4 percent), 
Maryland (35.1 percent), Kansas (37.8 percent), Oklahoma (37.8 percent), and Wyoming (37.8 percent).
In terms of the overall score, we examined five areas of lobbying disclosure laws: (1) registration requirements, 
(2) exemptions for government, (3) defining public entities, (4) materiality, and (5) disclosure.
(1) Registration
This component examined 11 categories of potential lobbying activity to determine who was required to reg-
ister within each state. The scores ranged from a high of 11 in Arizona to a low of 1 in Maryland, Minnesota, 
New Hampshire, New Jersey, and West Virginia. The average score (out of 11) for the 50 states was 6.4 or a 
little more than 50 percent.
In terms of private-sector lobbying, which included lobbyists, volunteer lobbyists, principals employing a 
lobbyist, and lobbying firms, the scores varied considerably. All 50 states require lobbyists to register. Only 17 
states, however, require volunteer lobbyists to register, only 24 states require principals to register, and only 17 
states require lobbying firms to register.
Perhaps more disconcerting are the results for public-sector entities. The average requirement of the seven 
categories of public-sector entities with the potential to engage in lobbying was 4.2. In other words, on average, 
states require 4.2 of the 7 categories of public-sector or taxpayer-funded organizations to register for lobbying 
activity. 
In some cases the exemptions were stark. For instance, only six states require government agencies to register 
when lobbying. Only 31 states include the legislative branch in lobbying registration requirements. Further, 13 
states exempt the governor’s office and the broader executive branch from lobbying registration.
These exemptions essentially mean that individuals in the private sector are required to register and report their 
lobbying activities while people in the public sector (taxpayer-funded) may be exempt even though they pursue 
the same lobbying activities.

10
(2) Exemptions for Government
The second group of criteria pertains to exemptions for government agencies and departments. A shocking 44 
states provide specific exemptions in their lobbying laws for public agencies and public officials. The common 
response was that such lobbying duties were a “natural” or inherent function of public office. That response 
ignores a crucial reality. By providing such exemptions, state governments are permitting taxpayer-funded 
organizations to undertake lobbying activities without the same transparency—and thus accountability—as 
required for private-sector lobbying. Indeed, some 18 states formally indicate in their lobbying laws that gov-
ernment agencies are not subject to the same disclosure requirements as private-sector lobbyists and principals. 
Exempting government agencies and departments seems to be an acute problem in states like Colorado, Ken-
tucky, Maine, Maryland, Nevada, New Hampshire, New Jersey, New York, Rhode Island, and West Virginia, 
all of whom received scores of 0 out of 4 on this measure.
(3) Defining Public Entities
Lobbying laws contain a definition of a public entity in only six states: Arizona, Indiana, Iowa, Ohio, Oregon, 
and South Carolina. The fact that 88 percent of states do not include a definition of public entities in their lob-
bying laws indicates a clear source of needed improvement in the future.
(4) Materiality Test
A full 32 states provide some type of exemption for small or immaterial lobbying activity. The 18 states that 
do not include an exemption for small lobbying activity should review their policies to ensure a proper balance 
between capturing meaningful lobbying activity and avoiding imposing compliance costs on small, incidental 
lobbying activities.
(5) Information Disclosure
Finally, the heart of the analysis relates to the actual information required to be disclosed by the principal and/
or the lobbyist. In all, the analysis included 20 discrete pieces of information ranging from basic contact infor-
mation to financial reporting to the timeliness of disclosure. Four states tied for the top position with a score of 
18 out of a possible 20: Alaska, Montana, New York, and Texas.
Wyoming and Oklahoma ranked last with just 5 out of 20, indicating a sparse requirement for disclosure. 
Other poorly performing states included Kansas (6), Nevada (6), North Dakota (7), Alabama (8), Tennessee 
(8), and West Virginia (9). The average score (out of 20) was 12.7, which indicates a weak performance, on 
average, for the state’s lobbying disclosure requirements.
Accessibility: How Easy Is It to Access the Disclosed Information?
The final section of the study analyzed the ease with which interested parties can access the information that 
emanates from the disclosures discussed above. It is not enough simply to require organizations to disclose 
information. A mechanism or system through which people can easily and anonymously access the disclosed 
information in a timely manner is a necessary condition to achieve transparency and thus accountability in lob-
bying.

11
Using a methodology similar to that of the lobbying disclosure laws section, a set of 22 criteria were developed 
that test the level and depth of accessibility in each state. Overall, the scores for accessibility to disclose infor-
mation range from a low of 5 (out of a possible 22) in Vermont and Wyoming to a high of 17.3 in Connecti-
cut. Other high-ranking states included North Carolina (14.3), Washington (14.3), New Jersey (14.0), and 
Indiana (13.3). 
The results for accessibility were generally worse than those for lobbying disclosure laws. For example, the 
average score was 9.6 out of a possible 22, or 43.6 percent. Put performance differently, 32 states or 64 percent 
failed to achieve a score in excess of 50 percent.
Every state makes lobbying data available and maintains a website. Such websites were rated for ease of  
access and for whether the information they offered was current. The differences between the states are based 
on access to historical data, the formatting of the data available, the ability to analyze data across a number  
of variables, and the ability to simultaneously sort data by multiple variables. 
For example, 37 of the 50 states provide historical information while only 17 provide data in a readily ana-
lyzable and downloadable format. There is also a large difference in performance with respect to sorting or 
analyzing disclosure data. The average score (out of a possible 15) for the number of variables was 4.4, while 
the average score for sorting multiple variables was 1.7. In other words, on average, the states allow users to 
sort lobbying data by 4.4 variables out of a possible 15 criteria and permit the simultaneous sorting of only 1.7 
variables (again out of a possible 15). The surprising insight here is that while states generally collect much of 
this information, for some reason they make it difficult to analyze the data using these criteria.
 
Comparison of Accessibility Scores with Disclosure Laws Scores
Finally, it is helpful to compare and combine the performance of the states across both the lobbying disclosure 
laws and accessibility to gain a better understanding of their overall performance.
Connecticut ranked first overall with an average score of 71.7 percent. Connecticut generally requires a fair 
amount of the recommended information to be disclosed and then facilitates access to that information in a 
reasonably productive manner. Other high-ranking states include Indiana (68.0 percent), Texas (67.1 percent), 
Washington (66.2 percent), Maine (65.3 percent), and Montana (65.2 percent).
New Hampshire ranked last overall with a score of 29.9 percent. Other poorly performing (low-ranking) states 
included Wyoming (30.3 percent), West Virginia (30.8 percent), Nevada (35.3 percent), and Maryland (38.5 
percent). The opposite is true for these states; they tend to require much less information to be disclosed from 
lobbying activity and then perform poorly in making the information available.
Overall, there is a marked need for improvement in both the nature of lobbying disclosure laws and accessibil-
ity to the data for almost every state. The top-ranked state (Connecticut) achieved a score of only 71.7 percent. 
Twenty-two states failed to achieve a score in excess of 50 percent, and the average score was a disappointing 
51.5 percent. Regardless of where they ranked, the states clearly have room for improvement in their lobbying 
disclosure laws and access to information.

12
Conclusion and Recommendations
This paper represents a step forward in our understanding of lobbying, particularly taxpayer-funded lobby-
ing, but it is not a destination. This study confirms the need for additional research and resources to study and 
understand lobbying, particularly taxpayer-funded lobbying.
States should begin to treat taxpayer-funded lobbying activity in the same manner as private-sector activities 
with respect to disclosure and regulation. States offer no coherent and consistent explanation for treating simi-
lar activities differently depending on the sector in which they occur.
In addition, almost every state is in need of improvement when it comes to its lobbying disclosure laws and 
accessibility to lobbying information. This report shines light on areas where each state needs to improve. Even 
those states that ranked high clearly have room for improvement. Other states require wholesale changes to 
their lobbying disclosure laws and/or accessibility.

13
INTRODUCTION 
The Founding Fathers thought engagement with one’s government important enough to afford it constitu-
tional protection. Specifically, we receive protection in the First Amendment, which states in part that “Con-
gress shall make no law . . . prohibiting . . . the right of the people . . . to petition the Government for a redress 
of grievances.”1 Lobbying also clearly provides bureaucrats and politicians with greater and more specialized 
information relating to specific issues under consideration. Indeed, more often than not, lobbyists are some of 
the most knowledgeable people regarding specific public-policy issues.2
And yet, lobbying seems to be increasingly viewed by both political practitioners and by the general public as a 
destructive and corrupt practice. This mounting negative view of lobbying may be the result of the high-profile 
fall of former Republican lobbyist Jack Abramoff in 2006,3 or the billions of dollars spent annually on lobby-
ing,4 or perhaps from the attention drawn to lobbying during the 2008 presidential campaign by Senator John 
McCain.5 Perhaps it was a combination of these and a host of other factors that have spurred public interest. 
Regardless, it remains clear that the public is interested in knowing more about political lobbying and its ef-
fects.
This study aims to improve readers’ understanding of lobbying across a 
number of different aspects. There is a fair amount of information available 
regarding lobbying of the federal government. In addition to government 
bodies tasked with disclosing information on lobbying in the House of 
Representatives and the Senate,6 private organizations, such as the Center 
for Responsive Politics,7 regularly publish and analyze lobbying data. The 
underlying premise of such disclosure is that information broadly dis-
seminated about lobbyists and their activities helps to self-regulate lobby-
ing. Put differently, people behave differently when their actions, and the 
results of their actions, are transparent and publicly available.
Unfortunately, we do not find an equivalent amount of information and transparency at the state and local 
levels. This study assesses the state of lobbying disclosure laws as well as the access to the information gleaned 
from such disclosure across the 50 states. It is an important step in the process of understanding and promot-
ing greater transparency, and thus accountability, in lobbying at the state level.
This study also tackles a subject that is almost completely ignored: the nature of organizations engaged in  
lobbying. Almost all of the current policy and economic research on lobbying examines private-sector  
organizations. The data indicate, however, that government and quasi-government organizations undertake  
a substantial amount of lobbying.8 The lobbying of one level of government by another is substantially different 
than the lobbying of government by private-sector firms, and it is critical that we understand the extent and 
dynamics of such government-to-government lobbying.
Lobbying seems to be  
increasingly viewed by 
both political practitioners 
and by the general public 
as a destructive and  
corrupt practice. 

14
Organization of the Study
This study examines the state of lobbying disclosure laws and the accessibility to the information disclosed at 
the state level across the country. It also considers the treatment of taxpayer-funded (government-to-govern-
ment) lobbying. Our main objective is to assess the quality and accessibility of lobbying information generally, 
with specific attention to taxpayer-funded organizations. Too often these get overlooked or simply lumped in 
with private-sector lobbying.
The first section provides background information about lobbying in order to create a context for thinking 
about lobbying and, in particular, taxpayer-funded lobbying. This section includes a brief overview of the lim-
ited amount of research available on these issues. The second section is a case study of state-level lobbying in 
California. We draw conclusions from that case study about the possible extent and breadth of taxpayer-funded 
lobbying at the state level. The third section analyzes both state lobbying disclosure laws and public accessibil-
ity to the disclosed information. We examine state lobbying disclosure laws using a set of criteria designed to 
promote transparency and accessibility to lobbying information. We then measure accessibility to lobbying 
information. The study ends with a brief conclusion and suggestions for future research and reform.

15
I. BACKGROUND AND CONTEXT
Defining Lobbying
The term lobbying has become almost exclusively linked with government and politics. It is now narrowly 
defined as work to influence or persuade politicians, bureaucrats, and the government by individuals, organized 
special interests, corporations, and unions.9
There is nothing in the true meaning of the term lobbying, however, that prevents it from applying outside of 
the political system. Lobbying means the attempt to persuade another person to accept your position or request 
on a particular matter. Such endeavors occur every day inside and outside of government. It is, however, the 
prominence and visibility of lobbying within the political arena that has placed its accepted meaning almost 
exclusively within politics.
Lobbying seems to have its roots in the political sphere, with various explanations regarding the term’s origin. 
The most prominent rests on U.S. President Ulysses S. Grant’s frequent patronage of the Willard Hotel bar 
while he was president (1869–1877). The story goes that people congregated in the hotel lobby, awaiting the 
president, to air their concerns and offer petitions.10 Others have linked the emergence of lobbying to people 
waiting outside the British House of Commons in an attempt to influence parliamentarians as they left the 
chamber.
We focus exclusively on political lobbying, which we define as attempting to persuade or convince people in 
the political process, such as politicians, bureaucrats, and political staff, to accept and implement a particular 
action or policy on a specific issue.
Organized Political Lobbying
Perhaps one of the most famous and notable writings on interest groups (once referred to as factions) is Fed-
eralist No. 10 by James Madison.11 Madison wrote Federalist No. 10 in continuation of Hamilton’s Federalist 
No. 9, which examined how the Union acted as a safeguard against domestic factions and insurrection. Madi-
son was particularly concerned about how the public good could be ignored in the “conflicts of rival parties” 
and how government resolutions can often be the result of an “interested and overbearing majority” rather than 
the rules of justice and the rights of all citizens. Madison readily admitted that citizens have a right to petition 
and engage their representatives for resolution of conflicts. He argued that a republican system of government 
covering a large rather than a small area was the best-known solution to mitigate the effects of factions and to 
protect individual rights. 
In order to understand lobbying and lobbyists, we need a better understanding of the interests behind them. 
After all, lobbyists undertake efforts on behalf of specific interests rather than their own.12 These special inter-
ests form a key part of the political system.13 In Federalist 10, Madison defined factions as “united and actuated 
by some common impulse of passion, or of interest, adverse to the rights of other citizens, or to the permanent 
and aggregate interests of the community.”14 Nobel laureate James Buchanan and his colleague Gordon Tull-

16
ock went so far as to conclude that the “emergence of such groups [special interests] to positions of dominant 
importance during the last half century has been one of the most significant developments in the American 
political scene.”15
These groups are referred to by a host of names, including special-interest groups, pressure groups, and advo-
cacy associations. We will simply refer to them as interest groups, which range from business and professional 
associations to unions, religious groups, environmentalists, and poverty advocates, to name but a few. They are 
formed to further the interests of their members and supporters.16 As Buchanan and Tullock explain,
the reason for the very existence of such groups lies in  
their ability to promote and to further, through the 
political-choice process, the particular functional 
interests represented.17
In other words, these groups are formed and maintained to advance the interests of their members rather than 
the “public interest.”18 This is an important insight since in many cases the goals of interest groups do not 
coincide with the general welfare or public interest.19
In economic terms, the formation and maintenance of interest groups is based on comparative advantage. In 
other words, these groups are able to apply pressure, persuade people, and ultimately secure gains (rewards) for 
their members in a more efficient and lower-cost manner than if people undertook the same activities individu-
ally.20 Political scholars William Mitchell and Randy Simmons explain the advantage of interest groups over 
individuals based on the “division of labor, specialization, and the power of concentrated passion and incen-
tives.”21 Similarly, Buchanan and Tullock stress the “differential advantages” available from organized interest 
groups compared to individual initiatives when it comes to securing gains in the political marketplace.22 Simply 
put, interest groups are able to secure gains at lower costs for their members than if their members acted inde-
pendently.
Competition Between Interest Groups
Since the early work of scholars such as Anthony Downs,23 there has been increasing interest in the role, influ-
ence, and effects of interest groups in the political process.24 Research and casual observation of interest groups 
beginning in the 1970s increasingly recognized the extent and costs of special-interest lobbying.25 This research 
caused mounting concern that individual groups were able to obtain favors (rewards) at the expense of the 
general public. Indeed, Buchanan and Tullock forcefully stated:
If all collective action should be of such a nature that the benefits and costs could be spread 
equally over the whole population of the community, no problem of the interest group, and 
indeed few of the problems of government, would arise. . . . Almost any conceivable collective 
action will provide more benefits to some citizens than to others, and almost any conceivable 
distribution of a given cost sum will bear more heavily on some individuals and groups than on 
others.26
In many cases the goals of interest 
groups do not coincide with the  
general welfare or public interest.

17
The underlying premise of these concerns was that interest groups could spend time and money persuading 
government to confer benefits on their specific members while distributing the costs of such benefits across the 
entire population, or at least a much larger group than was benefiting from the favor. 
Nobel laureate Gary Becker of the University of Chicago pub-
lished an important paper in 1983 examining the role and effect 
of competition between groups for rewards (favors).27 One of the 
insights leading him to examine this issue was the simple rec-
ognition that all government favors must impose costs on some 
group. For example, consider any agricultural commodity. There 
are interest groups on both sides of this issue that compete for the 
conflicting interests of their members. Specifically, the produc-
ers of the commodity will favor subsidies and trade protection, while the industries that use the commodity as 
an input will oppose such laws (favors). In other words, there is not just one unopposed interest group seeking 
favors. Becker showed how such competition between conflicting interests could constrain lobbying activity.
Among a number of important conclusions in the study, Becker established that “competition among these 
pressure groups for political influence determines the equilibrium structure of taxes, subsidies, and other politi-
cal favors.”28 Becker determined that competition between interest groups acted as a regulating influence on 
their behavior. He showed that there are some limits to the extent to which groups can successfully engage 
in rent seeking at the public expense. There is some level of resource or reward available to interest groups 
through the political process, and no group can spend more than the total of the expected reward. Research 
on lobbying indicates that interest groups discipline themselves based on the perceived probabilities of success 
of different endeavors in the political system. Competition between groups creates a powerful regulating force 
on both the individual actions of lobbyists and the overall market for lobbying. One of Becker’s most striking 
conclusions was that the criticism and occasional condemnation of interest groups was excessive and perhaps 
exaggerated because competition between groups resulted in beneficial and efficient outcomes.29
However, Becker also recognized the negative effects of unequal access to the political system and the accor-
dant differences in political influence. Becker recognized that effective competition could regulate activities 
and promote economic prosperity while also recognizing the negative effects of ineffective competition. He 
concluded that some types of lobbying, depending on the level and effectiveness of competition, could have 
considerably negative impacts on society’s general welfare.30
Taxpayer-Funded Lobbying
Becker’s recognition of the importance of competition and the nature of access in the political process are 
critical to our study. Almost all of the research on interest groups and lobbying examines private organiza-
tions, which have a number of market-based constraints. For example, private firms and their interest groups 
must show tangible results (rewards) to their funders and owners—otherwise, they will eventually question the 
efficacy of supporting the interest group. Private firms also face limited resources, which constrain what they 
can allocate for lobbying and interest-group activities.31 These limits are normally referred to in economics as 
the budget constraint of the firm. Private organizations cannot lose money either in aggregate or on specific 
endeavors for an indefinite amount of time. At some point, the constraint of resources forces fiscal discipline on 
Some types of lobbying, depending 
on the level and effectiveness  
of competition, could have  
considerably negative impacts  
on society’s general welfare.

18
firms. Finally, private firms, as illustrated by Becker, will more than likely compete with opposing interests in 
their lobbying efforts. 
The research to date has almost completely ignored an important participant in 
the political marketplace with vastly different characteristics than private firms: 
government. Government lobbying of other governments, or what is more com-
monly referred to as taxpayer-funded lobbying, is a material and important part 
of lobbying. Taxpayer-funded lobbying occurs when one level of government (or 
quasi-government) lobbies another level of government. For example, state gov-
ernments lobby the federal government for funding, and local governments lobby 
state governments for resources.
It is important to recognize that government and quasi-government organizations do not face the same con-
straints as private organizations. For example, there is almost always a separation between the resources col-
lected (taxes and other revenues) and the programs and services the resources are used to finance. Governments 
can collect revenues from their citizens regardless of the efficacy, nature, or even support for the programs and 
services provided. There is simply little or no mechanism for citizens to avoid paying the taxes used to finance 
the services they disagree with or don’t use. Similarly, governments do not necessarily need to show results for 
their efforts since there is no immediate or direct feedback for poor performance in specific government pro-
grams. In addition, governments and quasi-governments do not face the resource and financial constraints that 
private firms operate under.32 In fact, many government agencies and programs are actually designed to lose 
money on an ongoing basis, which is simply not possible in the private economy.
Perhaps most important is the realization that government lobbying of other governments does not generally 
face the type of competition outlined in Becker’s research. While there may be general taxpayer protection as-
sociations and small government advocacy groups, there are generally no issue-specific organizations to com-
pete against government lobbying of other levels of government. Governments may compete with one another 
for allocations, but they don’t tend to compete with other organizations whose aim is to negate the funding 
available to the governments. Put differently, governments may compete with one another for a slice of avail-
able resources, but they don’t compete for the existence of the resources in the first place. Indeed, the competi-
tion between governments for these resources can often create pressure to increase them.
Government lobbying, or what we will refer to as taxpayer-funded lobbying, does not face the same constraints 
as private-sector lobbying. It is, therefore, of paramount importance that such lobbying activities be as trans-
parent and open as possible.
Existing Research
Given the interest in lobbying generally and the increasing recognition of the need for transparency of lob-
bying activity, it is surprising to find very little research on either taxpayer-funded lobbying and its effects or 
state-level lobbying. This section summarizes several studies completed in these areas.
Government and 
quasi-government 
organizations do not 
face the same  
constraints as private 
organizations. 

19
Taxpayer-Funded Lobbying
James Bennett and Thomas DiLorenzo – Leading Lights
Economists James Bennett of George Mason University and Thomas DiLorenzo of Loyola University are 
leading researchers in taxpayer-funded lobbying. They have published a number of studies over the last decade 
and a half on this overlooked subject.
Destroying Democracy: How Government Funds Partisan Politics33
In 1985, Bennett and DiLorenzo published an important investigation into the nature, extent, and effects of 
federal taxpayer-funded lobbying. Their book, Destroying Democracy, provides a general framework for under-
standing how taxpayer-funded lobbying differs from private-sector lobbying. They present the political mar-
ketplace as a battle of ideas, where groups and organizations secure resources to convince their fellow citizens, 
bureaucrats, and politicians of the benefits of their position. This competition of ideas ensures that the best 
(i.e., most efficient) ideas prevail.
The authors explain how taxpayer-funded lobbying is inherently different. 
They describe it as an inappropriate and deleterious loophole within the 
government sector wherein the government supports groups and associa-
tions that support its own initiatives and goals. In this system, private, 
government-friendly organizations use taxpayer funds to advance the 
interests of bureaucrats and politicians. Bennett and DiLorenzo predict 
that such a circular system of support will inevitably advance and expand 
the government over the interests of citizens. 
Particularly important is their documenting of taxpayer-funded lobbying across sectors and through case stud-
ies. The book examines specific organizations such as the Campaign for Economic Democracy, the National 
Council of Churches, and ACORN, to name a few, in order to illustrate the perverse incentives and negative 
consequences of taxpayer-funded lobbying. In addition, they document how such activities occur across a host 
of sectors including consumer watch groups, energy, the environment, welfare, poverty programs, civil rights 
associations, seniors, legal services, and unions. The analysis, completed in 1984, foreshadowed not only an 
explosion of lobbying but also the expansion of the state.
Congress Twists Its Own Arm
Bennett and DiLorenzo followed up the 1985 book with an academic article in the economics journal Public 
Choice.34 The article makes two important contributions in addition to its aim of stimulating more thought 
and research on taxpayer-funded lobbying. The authors explain the dynamics and costs of publicly funded 
(taxpayer-funded) lobbying. They show how a small group of people with political connections can secure 
large resources from the government to mount lobbying efforts. That arrangement is markedly different from 
private-sector lobbying, where large numbers of people or firms are required to undertake similar efforts. The 
authors illustrate the asymmetry in resources often present between private-sector lobbying and taxpayer-fund-
ed lobbying.
In this system, private,  
government-friendly  
organizations use taxpayer 
funds to advance the  
interests of bureaucrats 
and politicians.

20
The article further illustrates how and why political players such as bureaucrats and politicians facilitate and 
protect taxpayer-funded lobbying. Bennett and DiLorenzo re-assert one of the basic insights garnered from 
public choice economics, which says that political participants act in their self-interest rather than in some 
noble sense of the public interest. This school of thought offers insights regarding why bureaucrats and poli-
ticians use taxpayer-funded lobbying even though Congress has “repeatedly legislated against the use of tax 
funds for political purposes.”35 
For example, a bureaucrat’s prestige, power, and resources are ultimately 
a function of the importance of their area, the resources allocated to 
their department or agency, and the visibility of their work. Bennett and 
DiLorenzo argue that bureaucrats can and do indirectly create pressure 
on government to increase the resources and priority of their own depart-
ments by funding private organizations. The funding of these organiza-
tions creates a self-reinforcing dynamic: the outside group receives gov-
ernment money in part used to lobby the government for more programs 
and services in the area the funding department is responsible for. This creates pressure for the government 
(generally) to allocate greater funds to the department, which then in part allows for even greater funding of 
outside groups to continue lobbying.
Bennett and DiLorenzo describe a similar situation for politicians. Funding to outside groups by the gov-
ernment creates naturally strong constituencies for members of Congress. These outside groups can provide 
volunteers, campaign resources, and so-called independent voices of support for politicians during re-election 
campaigns.
Bennett and DiLorenzo discuss the cases of actual taxpayer-funded groups such as the Food Research Action 
Center (FRAC), the National Council of Senior Citizens (NCSC), the National Urban League, the National 
Organization for Women (NOW), and the Legal Services Corporation (LSC). The discussion and analysis of 
these case studies provides real-life experiences and documentation of the costs and effects of taxpayer-funded 
lobbying.
Detailed Case Studies
Bennett and DiLorenzo then extended the case study analyses in the journal article by publishing four books 
that look more closely at specific cases of taxpayer-funded lobbying.36 The first book, CancerScam,37 examines 
lobbying efforts by the American Cancer Society and its relationship with the National Cancer Institute, a 
department of the government’s National Institutes of Health. The book is a fascinating exploration of how 
government promotion of itself through third-party, taxpayer-funded groups becomes a self-perpetuating 
dynamic. The second book, The Food and Drink Police,38 examines government efforts to impose tax and 
regulatory measures to change people’s behavior with respect to smoking, drinking, consumption of junk food, 
and other lifestyle decisions deemed negative. The last two books, From Pathology to Politics: Public Health 
in America (2000) and Public Health Profiteering (2001) examine health-related charities and their links with 
taxpayer-funded lobbying.
Government promotion of 
itself through third-party, 
taxpayer-funded groups 
becomes a self- 
perpetuating dynamic.

21
Tax-Funded Politics
The most recent installment is Tax-Funded Politics by James Bennett (2004).39 This work mixes a general dis-
cussion of taxpayer-funded lobbying with real-life case studies.
Bennett explains how federal regulations prohibiting the use of fed-
eral funds for lobbying are unenforceable and certainly not effective 
given the fungible nature of money.40 Bennett also builds on previ-
ous work to extend the explanation for (based on incentives), and the 
costs of, taxpayer-funded lobbying. Specifically, he explains how it 
creates a circular and self-promoting cycle between government of-
ficials and so-called independent charities and non-profits that act to 
promote government policies while receiving federal aid.
Bennett also built on previous work to extend the explanation for (based on incentives) and the costs of taxpay-
er-funded lobbying.
The book also provides vivid case studies documenting real-life instances where independent groups promoted 
government policies while receiving federal funds. The case studies cover a host of feminist groups, teacher 
unions, environmental groups, health organizations, minority groups, and conservative groups. All of chap-
ter seven in the book is dedicated to highlighting how many so-called conservative advocacy groups receive 
substantial support from government and then in turn support government policies. Bennett particularly makes 
note of institutions on the conservative right that support military intervention abroad.
Barr and Taxpayer-funded Lobbying in Arizona
Benjamin Barr reviews taxpayer-funded lobbying in the state of Arizona for the Goldwater Institute in Your 
Tax Dollars at Work: The Implications of Taxpayer-Funded Lobbying.41 His 2007 study offers key insights on this 
unique type of lobbying and empirically examines public (government) spending on lobbying between 2000 
and 2005 in Arizona.
Barr counted some 900 registered lobbyists for public entities (government) compared to 90 members of the 
Arizona legislature. The list of lobbyists employed by government and quasi-government entities in the state 
raises serious concerns about the scope of taxpayer-funded lobbying: Maricopa County (85 lobbyists), Navajo 
County (22), Pinal County (13), Gila County (13), Tucson (71), Phoenix (43), Sierra Vista (23), Chandler 
(21), Scottsdale (21), Department of Public Safety (41), Department of Education (38), Governor’s Office 
(30), Department of Transportation (22), University of Arizona (10), and Arizona State University (7).42 Gov-
ernment lobbyists outnumbered legislators by a 10:1 ratio and pervaded the entirety of the government and 
quasi-government sectors in Arizona.
Barr’s analysis further reveals that local governments spent more than $10 million to lobby the state govern-
ment over the 2000–2005 period. For example, Barr shows spending in excess of $1.8 million by the Depart-
ment of Transportation, State Parks, and the Governor’s Office. He also examines lobbying expenditures at the 
county level and shows that three counties—Maricopa, Pima, and Mohave—spent more than $3 million on 
lobbying during the 2000–2005 period. Barr concludes that the extent of resources being spent on lobbying by 
Many so-called conservative 
advocacy groups receive  
substantial support from  
government and then in turn 
support government policies. 

22
government surpasses most people’s expectations. Interestingly, Barr raises additional non-economic concerns 
about taxpayer-funded lobbying. He discusses, for example, the distorting nature of taxpayer-funded lobbying 
on the democratic process:
Taxpayer-funded lobbying—government bodies lobbying other government bodies—distorts 
the democratic process by supplanting the voice of citizens with that of the state. Instead of in-
teracting with citizen lobbyists, legislators contend with powerful voices from other regiments 
of government, each clamoring to promote its own interests, which are regularly and demon-
strably at odds with citizens’ interests. Lobbying with taxpayer dollars inevitably promotes 
government growth.43
Barr also describes potential constitutional conflicts arising from taxpayer-funded lobbying.44 Barr argues that 
the First Amendment is founded on a premise of citizen participation. Taxpayer-funded lobbying, Barr says, 
places government interests in conflict, or at the least in competition, with the interests of ordinary citizens. 
In addition, Barr argues that taxpayer-funded lobbying violates the First Amendment’s principle of neutrality, 
which prohibits government from imposing issues or viewpoints.
Finally, the Barr study explores two approaches to reforming taxpayer-funded lobbying: disclosure and prohibi-
tion.45 He contrasts the disclosure reforms pursued by Minnesota and Washington with the more restrictive 
reforms implemented by South Carolina, Georgia (proposed), and Florida. He concludes that more restrictive 
measures, including broad bans on taxpayer-funded lobbying, are required.46
Kerpen Briefing Paper
A more recent paper by Phil Kerpen of the Americans for Prosperity Foundation examines federal taxpayer-
funded lobbying data.47 Using federal data compiled by the Center for Responsive Politics, he analyzes lobby-
ing by state governments, local governments, public universities, transportation authorities, and public water 
authorities for the years 1998 to 2008. Nationwide, he finds that these government entities spent $138.1 
million lobbying the federal government in 2007, a 161.1 percent increase from the $52.9 million spent in 
1998.48 Kerpen further notes that the largest increases were recorded by local governments and public universi-
ties. Critically for our purposes, Kerpen concludes that “evidence from the states in which the problem of local 
governments lobbying at the state level has been analyzed suggests that this phenomenon is significantly more 
pervasive at the state level than at the federal level.” 49
Disclosure Research
In researching our study we searched a number of sources, both scholarly and applied, and found no compre-
hensive, systematic analysis of state-level lobbying expenditures across states, which obviously prevented any 
comprehensive assessment of taxpayer-funded lobbying. The consensus from a host of discussions is that a 
basic data problem prevents a nationwide analysis of state-level lobbying, which requires a step back to under-
stand disclosure laws that are the basis for public access to information. We found two fairly recent analyses 
of state-level disclosure laws, which not only helped us to understand the paucity of state-level data, but also 
aided in constructing the analytical framework for state-level lobbying disclosure laws.

23
Center for Public Integrity – Hired Guns50
The Center for Public Integrity conducted an analysis of state-level lobbying disclosure laws across the 50 
states in 2003. The Hired Guns survey looked at a number of aspects of lobbying disclosure laws, including 
lobbyist registration, spending, public access, and enforcement.51 A total of 48 questions were included in the 
survey. Analysts reviewed the statutes covering lobbying disclosure in each of the 50 states and directly in-
terviewed officials in the states. A total of 100 points were awarded from the 48 questions.52 Scores of 70 or 
higher were deemed to be satisfactory while scores below 60 were considered failings.53
Washington State received the highest score of 87 out of 100 and ranked first. A total of nine states received 
scores in excess of 70, indicating satisfactory performance on state-level lobbying disclosure laws.54 Sixteen 
states received scores between 60 and 69, which the study deemed to be “barely passing.”
More disconcerting, however, is that the remaining 25 states and the federal government all received scores 
below 60, indicating failure with respect to their disclosure laws. It is worth noting that Pennsylvania, which 
ranked dead last, actually received a score of 0. In addition, the federal government ranked third-last with an 
abysmal score of 36 out of 100.55 These 2003 scores indicate enormous room for improvement for state-level 
lobbying disclosure laws.
Common Cause Pennsylvania – Lobby Law Survey56
 
The Pennsylvania chapter of Common Cause issued a report 
similar to that of the Center for Public Integrity in 2004.57 The 
report examines a host of different aspects of lobbying disclosure laws at the state level, including the branches 
of government covered by disclosure laws, who is required to report, the information required to be reported 
on, the timing of reporting, exemptions, and enforcement.
This study included a series of specific questions capturing disclosure laws for government and quasi-govern-
ment. For example, the study found that only 12 states included local-government lobbying in their state-level 
lobbying disclosure laws. Similarly, only 22 states included independent state agencies in their state lobbying 
disclosure laws. Higher numbers were recorded for the governor (37), the executive branch agencies (34), and 
the legislatures (49). 
Unfortunately, there was no broad empirical analysis or conclusions as in the Center for Public Integrity study. 
Rather, the results were simply summarized by listing states that met each of the specific criteria. The report 
includes no overall results or recommendations.
Conclusion
Given the general acceptance of the importance of disclosure and transparency in lobbying, it is surprising 
that so little information exists. Unfortunately, the paucity of state-level data makes it prohibitively costly to 
undertake an empirical analysis of state-level lobbying, and in particular state-level taxpayer-funded lobbying. 
Section III of this paper analyzes the state of lobbying disclosure laws and accessibility to the subsequent infor-
mation across the states with a particular emphasis on taxpayer-funded lobbying. The methodology employed 
builds on the work noted previously.
Only 12 states included local-
government lobbying in their state-
level lobbying disclosure laws. 

24
II. WHY WE SHOULD CARE ABOUT TAXPAYER-FUNDED  
    LOBBYING: CALIFORNIA AS A CASE STUDY
We have already discussed the differences between taxpayer-funded lobbying and private-sector lobbying.  
A key subject remains: the size and breadth of taxpayer-funded lobbying. After all, if the amount and/or  
percentage of taxpayer-funded lobbying is comparatively small, then one would expect its effects and  
influences to be less than if it were a major source of lobbying.
California maintains a well-developed set of laws and definitions cover-
ing lobbying and lobbying disclosure.58 In addition, the state offers one 
of the better-performing websites in terms of accessibility of lobbying 
data.59 For these two reasons, we relied on California and the informa-
tion provided by its Secretary of State as a case study to analyze the 
extent of taxpayer-funded lobbying compared to other types of lobbying 
at the state level.60 The aim of this analysis is to ascertain the financial 
and relative importance of taxpayer-funded lobbying compared to other 
types.61 
California Definitions
Each state defines lobbyists and their activities slightly differently.62 It is important to understand the basic 
definitions used by California before analyzing the state-level lobbying data. California defines a lobbyist as
any individual who receives two thousand dollars ($2,000) or more in economic consider-
ation in a calendar month, other than reimbursement for reasonable travel expenses, or whose 
principal duties as an employee are, to communicate directly or through his or her agents with 
any elective state official, agency official, or legislative official for the purpose of influencing 
legislative or administrative action.63
Like the definition presented initially in the paper, California state lobbying law focuses on the expenditure of 
money and resources to influence people in the political system regarding legislation and related government 
actions.
State Lobbying by Category
California’s lobbying disclosure website allows users to categorize lobbying data by employer.64 The data can 
be sorted by the source of the lobbying rather than by the lobbyist (individual or firm) or by where the lobby-
ing efforts are aimed. Table 1 contains summary information for lobbying spending in California by employer 
category for the years 2007 and 2008. The percentage results are illustrated in figure 1. Note that California’s 
lobbying data is reported and disclosed on a two-year cycle.
California state lobbying law 
focuses on the expenditure 
of money and resources 
to influence people in the 
political system regarding 
legislation and related  
government actions.

25
California uses 19 categories to define lobbying expenditures. Most are straightforward, but a few require clari-
fication. The Government category includes municipalities, counties, regional authorities (including transporta-
tion, waste management, water, and recreation), and state and regional commissions (see Appendix A for more 
information).65 Miscellaneous, the second-largest category, contains a hodgepodge of organizations.66 It gener-
ally includes associations and advocacy groups as well as corporations that do not fit well in the other catego-
ries. For example, lobbying by the large accounting firms, AARP , a host of sector- and issue-specific advocacy 
groups, telecommunications companies, and environmental organizations are all included in this category.
Table 1: State Lobbying in California by Sector (2007 and 2008)
Sector Total - 2007 Total - 2008 TOTAL Percent of Total Rank
Agriculture  4,043,139  3,907,677  7,950,816 1.4% 14
Education  16,921,371  22,594,730  39,516,101 7.2% 6
Entertainment and 
Recreation
 5,751,989  5,099,323  10,851,312 2.0% 12
Finance and 
Insurance
 20,728,045  20,118,170  40,846,214 7.4% 5
Government  42,514,528  50,071,443  92,585,971 16.8% 1
Health  27,658,188  31,586,564  59,244,752 10.7% 3
Labor Unions  15,854,606  15,078,705  30,933,311 5.6% 8
Legal  3,809,553  3,351,443  7,160,996 1.3% 16
Lodging and 
Restaurants
 1,822,448  1,555,252  3,377,700 0.6% 18
Manufacturing 
and Industrial
 26,737,788  29,423,160  56,160,947 10.2% 4
Merchandise 
and Retail
 3,572,607  4,152,257  7,724,864 1.4% 15
Miscellaneous  49,114,909  41,095,856  90,210,764 16.3% 2
Oil and Gas  11,111,910  11,217,572  22,329,482 4.0% 10
Political 
Organizations
 420,867  458,187  879,053 0.2% 19
Professional 
and Trade
 15,371,675  16,016,994  31,388,669 5.7% 7
Public Employees  2,258,542  2,177,836  4,436,378 0.8% 17
Real Estate  6,270,987  6,155,042  12,426,029 2.2% 11
Transportation  4,987,408  5,419,556  10,406,965 1.9% 13
Utilities  10,910,374  13,240,072  24,150,446 4.4% 9
Total  269,860,933  282,719,837  552,580,771 
Source: Office of the Secretary of State, California, Political Reform Division (2009). Cal-Access: Lobbying Activity.  
Accessed October 1 and 2, 2009. Available at http://cal-access.ss.ca.gov/Lobbying/; calculations by the authors.

26
Source: Office of the Secretary of State, California, Political Reform Division (2009). Cal-Access: Lobbying Activity. Accessed on October 
1st and 2nd, 2009. Available at http://cal-access.ss.ca.gov/Lobbying/; calculations by the authors.
A total of $552.6 million was spent on lobbying in 2007 and 2008: $269.9 million in 2007 and $282.7 mil-
lion in 2008. As illustrated in figure 1, a little more than one-third of all lobbying expenditures in California 
in 2007 and 2008 were by Government (16.8 percent) and Miscellaneous (16.3 percent). Government lobbying 
represented the single largest category of lobbying at $92.6 million, or 16.8 percent of the total. In other words, 
the single largest category of state-level lobbying was performed by other levels of government, such as munici-
palities, counties, regional authorities (transportation, water, waste management, and recreation), and commis-
sions.
Nine of the 19 categories of lobbying expenditures represented 
roughly 2.0 percent or less each of the total lobbying spending in 
2007 and 2008. In dollar terms, these smaller categories ranged 
from $879,053 in expenditures for Political Organizations (ranked 
19th) to $12.4 million for Real Estate (ranked 11th). The four larg-
est categories— Government, Miscellaneous, Health (10.7 percent), 
and Manufacturing and Industrial (10.2 percent)—are responsible 
for more than half of all the lobbying spending in California dur-
ing this period. 
The single largest category  
of state-level lobbying was  
performed by other levels of  
government, such as  
municipalities, counties, regional 
authorities (transportation, water, 
waste management, and  
recreation), and commissions.

27
Complicating Matters – Understanding the Definitions
Many of the results contained in table 1 and figure 1 are based on how the categories were defined. Our goal of 
determining and analyzing the extent of taxpayer-funded lobbying requires us to go beyond the definitions and 
categories presented above. Recall that the core issue is the source of the funds and resources used by organi-
zations in lobbying. If the resources are ultimately provided or secured by the government, then the lobbying 
activity is correctly defined as taxpayer-funded (what some researchers call quasi-government).67 For our pur-
poses, the categories of Education, Public Employees, and Labor Unions need further exploration.68 
The analysis of these three categories entailed individually examining each of the organizations listed in the 
Secretary of State’s 2007 and 2008 reports. We used a conservative approach in categorizing each organiza-
tion. If there was any doubt regarding whether an organization was taxpayer-funded, it was excluded. Ideally, 
more time and resources would have been available to inspect each organization more thoroughly. However, 
we believe the following analysis presents a realistic and conservative estimate of additional taxpayer-funded 
organizations engaged in lobbying in California.
(1) Education
Education was the sixth-largest category of lobbying spending in 2007 and 2008, with more than $39.5 
million in expenditures (table 1). There is a great deal of lobbying spending categorized in Education that is 
rightly included as taxpayer-funded. Appendix B contains information on lobbying expenditures by Education 
organizations for 2007 and 2008 in California.69 Lobbying spending by local public-school districts, public 
charter schools, community colleges, and employee-employer education advocacy groups can all be reasonably 
classified, to some extent, as taxpayer-funded.
Funding for the first three categories (local public-school districts, public charter schools, and community 
colleges) is almost entirely provided by local and/or state governments. These three categories are therefore 
re-categorized as taxpayer-funded because of the extent of government resources used to finance them. An 
additional $10.6 million of taxpayer-funded lobbying spending in 2007 and 2008 is the result when we reclas-
sify spending by these education organizations: local public education districts ($8.4 million), public charter 
schools ($281,415), and community colleges ($2.0 million).
The final group, advocacy organizations and associations, is less straightforward. This category includes a wide 
range of organizations, such as employee and employer education associations (Appendix B). However, the re-
sources collected and used to finance the operations and lobbying by these groups come largely—almost exclu -
sively—from government, either directly or indirectly. Admittedly, the connection is not as strong as it was in 
the first three categories. The essential issue pursued in this paper, however, is whether the funding should be 
considered taxpayer-sourced, and for most of these groups, the resources are ultimately provided by taxpayers. 
Re-categorizing these types of organizations’ lobbying expenditures as taxpayer-funded results in an additional 
$15.7 million in spending for lobbying in 2007 and 2008.
(2) Public Employees
Public Employees is the third-smallest category of lobbying spending, with a little more than $4.4 million in 
expenditures in 2007 and 2008 (see table 1). Like the examination of advocacy groups in Education, the Public 

28
Table 2: State Lobbying by Public Employees, 2007 and 2008
NAME 2007/2008
AMERICAN FEDERATION OF STATE, COUNTY AND MUNICIPAL EMPLOYEES LOCAL 3299 46,129 
ASSOCIATION FOR LOS ANGELES DEPUTY SHERIFFS 178,143 
ASSOCIATION OF ORANGE COUNTY DEPUTY SHERIFFS 37,830 
ASSOCIATION OF RETIRED TEACHERS 40,910 
CALIFORNIA ASSOCIATION OF HIGHWAY PATROLMEN 336,490 
CALIFORNIA ASSOCIATION OF PROFESSIONAL SCIENTISTS 341,676 
CALIFORNIA ATTORNEYS ADMINISTRATIVE LAW JUDGES AND HEARING OFFICERS IN STATE EMPLOYMENT 172,558 
CALIFORNIA FISH & GAME WARDEN SUPERVISORS AND MANAGERS ASSOCIATION (CFGWSMA) 45,670 
CALIFORNIA JUDGES ASSOCIATION 206,761 
CALIFORNIA ORGANIZATION OF POLICE & SHERIFFS 12,000 
CALIFORNIA PUBLIC PARKING ASSOCIATION 55,211 
CALIFORNIA RETIRED COUNTY EMPLOYEES ASSOCIATION 35,106 
CALIFORNIA STATE PARK RANGERS ASSOCIATION 9,185 
CDF FIREFIGHTERS 441,599 
GLENDALE CITY EMPLOYEES ASSOCIATION 5,875 
LOS ANGELES COUNTY EMPLOYEES RETIREMENT ASSOCIATION (LACERA) 91,254 
LOS ANGELES POLICE PROTECTIVE LEAGUE 146,245 
LOS ANGELES PROBATION OFFICERS’ UNION, AFSCME LOCAL 685 131,926 
ORANGE COUNTY EMPLOYEES ASSOCIATION 162,430 
ORANGE COUNTY PROFESSIONAL FIREFIGHTERS, IAFF, LOCAL 3631 11,116 
PEACE OFFICERS RESEARCH ASSOCIATION OF CALIFORNIA 782,109 
PROFESSIONAL ENGINEERS IN CALIFORNIA GOVERNMENT 589,759 
RETIRED PUBLIC EMPLOYEES ASSOCIATION 166,790 
RIVERSIDE SHERIFFS’ ASSOCIATION 83,678 
SACRAMENTO COUNTY DEPUTY SHERIFFS ASSOCIATION 55,070 
SAN BERNARDINO COUNTY SAFETY EMPLOYEES’ BENEFIT ASSOCIATION 119,813 
SAN DIEGO COUNTY EMPLOYEES RETIREMENT ASSOCIATION 6,000 
SAN DIEGO MUNICIPAL EMPLOYEES ASSOCIATION 55,332 
SAN FRANCISCO POLICE OFFICERS ASSOCIATION 24,000 
STATE COALITION OF PROBATION ORGANIZATIONS 45,713 
Total 4,436,378 
Source: Office of the Secretary of State, California, Political Reform Division (2009). Cal-Access: Lobbying Activity.  
Accessed October 1 and 2, 2009. Available at http://cal-access.ss.ca.gov/Lobbying/. 
Employees category is not entirely straightforward. It includes advocacy associations for government workers, 
sheriffs and police, teachers, judges, firefighters, and probation officers (see table 2). The key aspect is that all 
of the employees are public-sector workers. The salaries and benefits of all workers included in this category 
are paid for by various levels of government (i.e., the taxpayer). The re-classification of this group as taxpayer-
funded results in an additional $4.4 million in lobbying spending in 2007 and 2008.

29
(3) Labor Unions
Labor Unions was the eighth-largest category of lobbying spending in 2007 and 2008, with some $30.9 mil-
lion in expenditures. Interestingly, a number of employee associations in the Labor Union category seem to be 
more accurately classified in the Public Employees category given the nature of the workers. A quick glance at 
table 3 reveals a number of organizations that are largely, and in some cases exclusively, public-sector employ-
ee-based, such as correctional officers, teachers, firefighters, court officers, and state, county, and municipal 
workers. Some organizations are included in both categories. Our analysis, as contained in table 3, shows that 
a little more than one-quarter (26.2 percent) of the organizations included in Labor Unions can be defined as 
taxpayer-funded. Of the $30.9 million spent by Labor Unions on lobbying in 2007 and 2008 in California, $8.1 
million can be re-classified as taxpayer-funded.
Table 3: State Lobbying by Labor Unions, 2007 and 2008
NAME  2007/2008 
1) Likely Taxpayer-Funded Unions
AMERICAN FEDERATION OF STATE, COUNTY & MUNICIPAL EMPLOYEES, LOCAL 2620  168,397 
AMERICAN FEDERATION OF STATE, COUNTY, AND MUNICIPAL EMPLOYEES,  AFL-CIO  435,420 
CALIFORNIA CORRECTIONAL PEACE OFFICERS ASSOCIATION (CCPOA)  822,979 
CALIFORNIA FEDERATION OF TEACHERS  1,233,193 
CALIFORNIA PROFESSIONAL FIREFIGHTERS  1,321,660 
CALIFORNIA SCHOOL EMPLOYEES ASSOCIATION  3,314,954 
CALIFORNIA STATE EMPLOYEES ASSOCIATION  283,875 
CALIFORNIA STATEWIDE LAW ENFORCEMENT ASSOCIATION  100,919 
COALITION OF UNIVERSITY EMPLOYEES (CUE)  78,000 
LOS ANGELES COUNTY PROFESSIONAL PEACE OFFICERS ASSOCIATION  140,759 
SAN BERNARDINO PUBLIC EMPLOYEES ASSOCIATION  133,479 
SAN DIEGO COUNTY COURT EMPLOYEES ASSOCIATION  20,468 
SAN LUIS OBISPO COUNTY EMPLOYEES ASSOCIATION  28,382 
SANTA ROSA CITY EMPLOYEES ASSOCIATION  12,013 
Sub-Total  8,094,499 26.2%
2) Likely Private-Sector Unions
AMERICAN FEDERATION OF TELEVISION AND RADIO ARTISTS  64,031 
AMERICAN MARITIME OFFICERS  20,031 
CALIFORNIA ASSOCIATION OF PSYCHIATRIC TECHNICIANS  84,000 
CALIFORNIA CONFERENCE BOARD OF THE AMALGAMATED TRANSIT UNION  128,580 
CALIFORNIA CONFERENCE OF MACHINISTS  92,809 
CALIFORNIA FEDERATION OF INTERPRETERS, THE NEWSPAPER GUILD/COMMUNICATION 
WORKERS OF AMERICA LOCAL 39521  65,442 
CALIFORNIA LABOR FEDERATION, AFL-CIO  3,382,835 
CALIFORNIA NURSES ASSOCIATION  1,623,754 
CALIFORNIA STATE ASSOCIATION OF ELECTRICAL WORKERS  223,637 
CALIFORNIA STATE COUNCIL OF LABORERS  1,626,328 
CALIFORNIA STATE COUNCIL OF SERVICE EMPLOYEES  10,292,428 
CALIFORNIA STATE LEGISLATIVE BOARD, UNITED TRANSPORTATION UNION  855,632 

30
CALIFORNIA STATE LEGISLATIVE BOARD/BROTHERHOOD OF LOCOMOTIVE ENGINEERS & TRAINMEN  24,000 
CALIFORNIA STATE PIPE TRADES COUNCIL  193,122 
CALIFORNIA STATE PIPE TRADES COUNCIL JOINT APPRENTICESHIP COMMITTEE  29,300 
CALIFORNIA TEAMSTERS PUBLIC AFFAIRS COUNCIL  651,833 
CALIFORNIA UNIONS FOR RELIABLE ENERGY  12,811 
CALIFORNIA UNITED HOMECARE WORKERS  55,039 
CALIFORNIA-NEVADA CONFERENCE OF OPERATING ENGINEERS  158,986 
COMMUNICATIONS WORKERS OF AMERICA  -   
COMMUNICATIONS WORKERS OF AMERICA LOCAL 9400  16,045 
DIRECTORS GUILD OF AMERICA, INC.  47,210 
ENGINEERS AND SCIENTISTS OF CALIFORNIA LOCAL 20, IFPTE AFL-CIO & CLC  70,915 
INDEPENDENT EMPLOYEES OF MERCED COUNTY  700 
INTERNATIONAL BROTHERHOOD OF ELECTRICAL WORKERS (IBEW) LOCAL 569  -   
INTERNATIONAL BROTHERHOOD OF ELECTRICAL WORKERS, LOCAL 1245  154,568 
INTERNATIONAL BROTHERHOOD OF ELECTRICAL WORKERS, LOCAL 18  46,839 
INTERNATIONAL BROTHERHOOD OF ELECTRICAL WORKERS, LOCAL 465  20,609 
INTERNATIONAL BROTHERHOOD OF ELECTRICAL WORKERS, LOCAL 47  46,839 
INTERNATIONAL BROTHERHOOD OF ELECTRICAL WORKERS, LOCAL 659  1,564 
INTERNATIONAL LONGSHORE AND WAREHOUSE UNION, COAST PRO RATA COMMITTEE, AFL-CIO  93,428 
INTERNATIONAL UNION OF ELEVATOR CONSTRUCTORS, LOCAL 18  12,350 
INTERNATIONAL UNION OF ELEVATOR CONSTRUCTORS, LOCAL 8  12,350 
JOCKEYS’ GUILD, INC.  64,511 
ORGANIZATION OF SMUD EMPLOYEES  20,187 
PROFESSIONAL & TECHNICAL ENGINEERS, LOCAL 21, IFPTE, AFL-CIO  45,678 
ROAD SPRINKLER FITTERS U.A. LOCAL 669  16,793 
SERVICE EMPLOYEES INTERNATIONAL UNION, LOCAL 1000  774,280 
SERVICE EMPLOYEES INTERNATIONAL UNION, LOCAL 434B  303,436 
SHEET METAL WORKERS UNION, LOCAL 104  -   
SHIP CLERKS ASSOCIATION ILWU LOCAL #34  18,276 
SPORTSMEN IN LABOR COALITION  -   
SPRINKLER FITTERS AND APPRENTICES UA LOCAL 483  16,012 
SPRINKLER FITTERS UA LOCAL 709  17,809 
STATE BUILDING & CONSTRUCTION TRADES COUNCIL OF CALIFORNIA  403,322 
STRATEGIC COMMITTEE OF PUBLIC EMPLOYEES, PACIFIC SOUTHWEST REGION,  
LABORERS INTERNATIONAL UNION OF NORTH AMERICA, AFL-CIO  34,657 
UNION OF AMERICAN PHYSICIANS AND DENTISTS  229,283 
UNITE HERE, INTERNATIONAL UNION  179,270 
UNITED DOMESTIC WORKERS OF AMERICA / NUHCE, AFSCME, AFL-CIO  248,527 
UNITED FARM WORKERS  149,370 
UNITED FOOD AND COMMERCIAL WORKERS WESTERN STATES COUNCIL  124,432 
UTILITY WORKERS UNION OF AMERICA, LOCAL 246  9,128 
WESTERN STATES COUNCIL OF SHEET METAL WORKERS  75,826 
Total  30,933,311 
Source: Office of the Secretary of State, California, Political Reform Division (2009). Cal-Access: Lobbying Activity.  
Accessed October 1 and 2, 2009. Available at http://cal-access.ss.ca.gov/Lobbying/.  

31
Taxpayer-Funded Lobbying in California Restated
Not surprisingly, the reclassifications summarized above result in a more pronounced dominance for Gov-
ernment and related taxpayer-funded lobbying in California. Table 4 contains the adjusted dollar values and 
percent of total lobbying amounts for 2007 and 2008, and figure 2 illustrates the percentage totals. The revised 
Government and related taxpayer-funded lobbying 
totaled $131.4 million in 2007 and 2008, repre-
senting nearly one-quarter (23.8 percent) or one in 
every four dollars of lobbying in California in 2007 
and 2008. 
The next-largest category, Miscellaneous, represents 
roughly two-thirds the value of Government and related taxpayer-funded lobbying. The bottom 12 categories of 
lobbying (Political Organizations to Utilities) constitute nearly the same percentage (25.9 percent) as the single 
Government category. This leaves no other conclusion: government lobbying of other government in California 
is a dominant source of lobbying at the state level.70 
Table 4: Adjusted State Lobbying in California by Sector (2007 and 2008)
Sector Total Percent of Total Rank
Agriculture  7,950,816 1.4% 14
Education*  13,247,874 2.4% 10
Entertainment and Recreation  10,851,312 2.0% 12
Finance and Insurance  40,846,214 7.4% 5
Government & Taxpayer-Funded Generally  131,385,075 23.8% 1
Health  59,244,752 10.7% 3
Labor Unions*  22,838,812 4.1% 8
Legal  7,160,996 1.3% 16
Lodging and Restaurants  3,377,700 0.6% 17
Manufacturing and Industrial  56,160,947 10.2% 4
Merchandise and Retail  7,724,864 1.4% 15
Miscellaneous  90,210,764 16.3% 2
Oil and Gas  22,329,482 4.0% 9
Political Organizations  879,053 0.2% 18
Professional and Trade  31,388,669 5.7% 6
Real Estate  12,426,029 2.2% 11
Transportation  10,406,965 1.9% 13
Utilities  24,150,446 4.4% 7
Total  552,580,772 100.0%
      
Source: Office of the Secretary of State, California, Political Reform Division (2009). Cal-Access: Lobbying Activity. 
Accessed October 1 and 2, 2009. Available at http://cal-access.ss.ca.gov/Lobbying/; calculations by the authors. 
Notes: 
(1) * The totals for Labor Unions and Education have been adjusted to reflect likely government entities that have 
been re-classified in the Government category.     
(2) The category of Public Employees has been included in its entirety in the Government category.
The bottom 12 categories of lobbying  
(Political Organizations to Utilities)  
constitute nearly the same percentage (25.9 
percent) as the single Government category. 

32
California in a Federal Context
Just as it was important to place state-level taxpayer-funded lobbying into perspective by comparing to other 
types, we also assess the magnitude of taxpayer-funded lobbying at the state level compared to the federal level. 
The Center for Responsive Politics’ Open Secrets project collects and organizes federal lobbying data on a 
quarterly basis.71
According to their data, there was a total of $3.3 billion in lobbying spending in 2008.72 The data is further 
classified by industry, which includes 20 separate classifications such as Pharmaceuticals and Health Products, 
Oil and Gas, Education, Real Estate, and Defense Aerospace.73 One of the categories, Civil Servants and Public 
Officials, is close to the state-level definition used in California for Government. This proximity allows us 
to compare the magnitude of government lobbying at the state level with government lobbying at the  
federal level.
According to the Center for Responsive 
Politics, a total of $84.2 million in lobbying 
spending in 2008 can be classified as  
Civil Servants and Public Officials. Our 
interest, however, is in comparing the 
numbers available for California rather 
than for the country as a whole.  
Analyzing the individual lobbying expenditures available in this category by state allows us to discern the 
amount of lobbying spending from California at the federal level.74 Our analysis of the individual data in-
Taxpayer-funded lobbying of the federal government 
by California organizations is a little more than  
40 percent of the spending on lobbying by  
taxpayer-funded groups in California at the state level. 

33
dicates that some $20.7 million or nearly one-quarter of the entire category of lobbying spending by Civil 
Servants and Public Officials was based in California.
More surprising, however, is how the $20.7 million spent by California-based taxpayer-funded organizations 
on the federal government compares to similar expenditures at the state level. Recall that the unadjusted  
total lobbying spending by Government in California for state-level lobbying was $50.1 million in 2008. 
Put differently, taxpayer-funded lobbying of the federal government by California organizations is a little  
more than 40 percent of the spending on lobbying by taxpayer-funded groups in California at the state level.  
It appears as if the magnitude of taxpayer-funded lobbying at the state level far surpasses, by a magnitude of 
two-and-a-half times what we observe at the federal level, using California as a case study.

34
III. ASSESSING STATE DISCLOSURE LAWS AND ACCESSIBILITY
Introduction
This section examines the disclosure laws and accessibility of lobbying information at the state level, with 
particular emphasis on taxpayer-funded lobbying. The premise of both sections is that transparency is a neces-
sary step in monitoring and imposing discipline on lobbying activity. Transparency allows interested citizens 
and third parties to scrutinize and verify the activities and operations of public organizations, which imposes 
discipline. More simply, transparency ensures that people act in a more responsible and productive manner. 
Daniel Kaufmann concluded that transparency was one of the key components of good governance in both the 
public and private sectors.75
In a more expansive study that included data from 169 countries, Roumeen 
Islam found that countries that are more transparent also have higher-qual-
ity governance.76Along similar lines, Simeon Djankov and his colleagues, 
examining data for 175 countries, found that disclosure was correlated with 
lower corruption in the public sphere.77 Indeed, work completed by the 
World Bank and others has repeatedly shown that better governance, and in 
particular, reduced corruption, is best achieved through transparency, which 
improves institutional accountability.78
The next two sections aim to promote transparency through lobbying disclosure laws and government mecha-
nisms that make disclosure information readily accessible.
Transparency, like the term lobbying, has a number of meanings. The World Bank defines it as an effective flow 
of information.79 For our purposes, we will extend that definition to define transparency as information that is 
of high quality, easily and anonymously accessible, and timely. 
This section examines the foundation of transparency, which is the requirement to disclose information. 
Specifically, we present an empirical examination of state-level disclosure laws pertaining to individuals and 
organizations engaged in lobbying. Our examination relies to some extent on previous work completed by or-
ganizations like the Center for Public Integrity and Common Cause. The next section examines how accessible 
the disclosed information is for interested parties. After all, it’s not enough for information to be disclosed if it 
is not accessible.
Methodology
Before examining the specific methodologies in each of the two sections, it is worth noting the general ap-
proach and timeline used in this portion of the study.
A preliminary analysis of state disclosure laws and accessibility to the information was completed in mid-No-
vember 2009. The results of that analysis were emailed to representatives in each of the states between Novem-
Transparency ensures 
that people act in a 
more responsible and 
productive manner. 

35
ber 20 and November 30, 2009, for review and confirmation. Most of the correspondence was sent to general 
email addresses provided on the Secretary of State or State Ethics Commission websites. In some cases the 
websites provided a specific email address and contact point for inquiries. Initially, respondents were given until 
the end of December to confirm the results or request changes.
Follow-up calls and emails were made on December 15 and 16. Efforts were made at this time to secure spe-
cific email and/or telephone contact information for people at the appropriate departments in each of the states 
that had not yet responded.
In order to improve the response rate and in recognition of the extended holidays in November and December, 
we extended the initial deadline to mid-January. Additional follow-up calls and emails were completed before 
January 8. 
In all, a total of 34 states (68 percent) responded to our inquiries.80 Three of the 34 responding states 
indicated that they did not have the time or resources available to complete the review.81 The remaining 
31 states either confirmed the analysis or requested changes.82 Almost all of the changes requested by state 
officials were made.83 
Lobbying-Law Disclosure – A State-by-State Analysis84
This section of the study quantitatively assesses each state’s lobbying disclosure laws across a common set of 
criteria. The criteria are partially based on previous studies noted elsewhere. In addition, the criteria have been 
expanded in order to ensure specific information regarding taxpayer-funded lobbying.
The criteria are summarized below and categorized to assist readers in understanding the premise for each 
question. The scoring of the criteria was simply a Yes (affirmative response) or No (negative response) response 
to each question. Weights were not attached to any of the questions. In all cases except questions B1 and B2, 
affirmative responses (Yes) were granted a score of 1 while negative responses (No) were allocated a score of 0. 
The rationale for the scoring is that affirmative responses to the questions were deemed superior to negative 
responses in promoting disclosure of lobbying information.
State Disclosure Law Criteria
The first set of questions (A) pertains to the organizations covered by the disclosure laws. There are essentially 
two groups of potential organizations: private and public (government). Specifically, questions A1 to A4  
cover private-sector entities while the remaining questions pertain to government or quasi-government  
organizations.
A) Who is required to register?
1. Lobbyists?
 2. Volunteer lobbyists?
 3. Principals who employ a lobbyist?
 4. Lobbying firms?

36
 5. Governor’s office?
 6. Executive branch agencies?
 7. Legislative branch?
 8. Independent agencies?
 9. Local governments?
 10. Government agencies who lobby other agencies? 
 11. Public entities, other than government agencies?
The second and third sets of questions (B and C) relate to how government 
agencies and other public entities are treated and defined relative to their 
private-sector counterparts. The aim of these questions is to ascertain whether 
government or quasi-government organizations are treated differently than 
other private-sector organizations in terms of the disclosure requirements 
imposed on them.
B) Government exemptions
1. Is there an exemption for government agencies and/or public officials acting within their official 
capacity?85
2. Are government agencies relieved and/or exempted (partially) from the regulations imposed on non-
government organizations and individuals?86
3. Are government agencies subject to the same disclosure requirements as lobbyists?
4. Are government agencies subject to the same disclosure requirements as principals?
In addition, and quite critically, question C pertains to whether the state government has a specific (and hope-
fully clear) definition of what constitutes a “public entity.” A host of organizations and agencies, as discussed 
in the analysis of California lobbying, are difficult to categorize. Categorization is easier when governments 
provide guidelines. Question C includes three different possible sets of guidelines that a government could 
incorporate in defining a public entity. Our analysis concerns itself not with how a state might define a public 
entity, but with whether it provides a clear definition of a public entity.
C) Does the law include a definition of “public entity?” If Yes, does the definition rely on these three inclusive 
criteria to determine “public” status? 
1. Ownership 
2. Structure or composition of revenue
3. Public charter or special government protection
The criteria in question D pertain to exemptions for immaterial lobbying activity. Specifically, some govern-
ments rightly attempt to exempt small lobbying activities from disclosure requirements. Imagine a small 
business owner who spends a few hours and possibly a few hundred dollars to have a problem rectified through 
government. Requiring the business to file expensive lobbying compliance reports and possibly incur legal 
and/or accounting expenses to do so would be damaging to the economy and counterproductive. The worthy 
objective of trying to exempt these rather small and inconsequential acts of lobbying has to be balanced against 
a set of rules that would allow others to game the system in order to under-report their activities. Essentially 
governments must use some type of threshold calculation in order to exempt marginal lobbying activities. We 
Governments must use 
some type of threshold 
calculation in order  
to exempt marginal 
lobbying activities. 

37
suggest the use of financial (dollar-value) or time thresholds as a mechanism by which to limit the amount of 
gaming permitted in reporting while still achieving a limited exemption for small, marginal lobbying activities. 
Like question C, the analysis of question D does not concern itself with how a government might establish and 
operate an exemption, but with whether it maintains one at all.
D) Does the law include a materiality test (ability to exempt) for coverage in disclosure regulations? Such tests 
could include:
1. Financial threshold: if expenses are less than some dollar threshold then the entity is exempted from 
filing disclosure. If Yes, what is the dollar threshold?
2. Time threshold: if the amount of time devoted to lobbying is less than a threshold percentage of an 
individual’s compensated time then the individual or entity is exempted from filing disclosure. If Yes, 
what is the percentage threshold?
E) Information Disclosed87
Finally, question E relates to the actual information that must be disclosed. We have included disclosure re-
quirements for both the principal (organization or entity that hires a lobbyist) and lobbyists. The higher score 
of either is used in our analysis. The reason for this is that the data reported is essentially the same. Thus, if a 
state required both principals and lobbyists to disclose information, as long as all the criteria are included, the 
source really doesn’t matter.
There are two exceptions to this rule: spending and legislative disclosure (questions F and G) and the reporting 
of the principal (question J), which pertain to the disclosure of spending on lobbying and the identification of 
specific legislation on which lobbying was undertaken, respectively. Ideally, states require both principals and 
lobbyists to disclose this information. Thus, states are rewarded through higher scores when both principals 
and lobbyists are required to submit this information, which admittedly creates some overlap.88 The reason for 
the preference for double-reporting of financial and legislative identification is that there are important nu-
ances and benefits from specific information pertaining to spending on legislative initiatives. If only one of the 
principal or lobbyist reports this information, particularly when it is aggregated, important details and nuances 
are lost.
The second exception, question J, pertains to whether principals are required to disclose their financial support-
ers or contributors. It is meant to assess whether state disclosure laws require a disclosure of the ultimate source 
of financing for lobbying activities. This question is assessed independently of the other questions contained in 
question E.
Finally, it is worth noting the nature of the questions relating to the frequency of disclosure reporting (ques-
tions E1h and E2h). Obviously, the main goal is a broad set of disclosure laws that make readily available a 
wealth of information regarding lobbying activity. However, a question remains about the timeliness of the 
disclosed data. For example, if data is required to be disclosed annually, then there is a high probability that 
information will not be available during the time when legislation is actively being debated. This will block the 
sunshine of transparency until some later date. More frequent disclosure requirements—such as monthly, quar -
terly, or tri-annually (to match the legislative calendar)—are beneficial. 89 Thus, the scoring for this data rewards 
1 point for reporting of lobbying data based on intervals of less than three times a year.

38
E1) Principal Reports: 
a. Are principals required to disclose? If Yes, below: 
b. Are principals required to disclose their address and phone number? 
c. Are principals required to disclose the names of all the lobbyists representing them? 
d. Are principals required to disclose the address and phone number of contracted lobbyists? 
e. Are principals required to disclose the nature of the business (public or private)?
f. What are the required components of a disclosure report? 
  i. Direct lobbying costs (compensation)
ii. Indirect lobbying costs (non-compensation) 
iii. Other costs such as gifts, entertainment, transportation, and lodging
iv. Is the information disclosed in an itemized format (as opposed to an aggregated or lump-
sum amount)?
g. Are principals required to disclose information on the issue lobbied:
i. By the general issues lobbied?
  ii. By the specific bill number or legislation ID?
h. How frequently are principals required to report? 
  i. Monthly?
  ii. Quarterly? 
  iii. Tri-annually? (linked with legislative calendar)
  iv. Semi-Annually?
  v. Annually?
  vi. Other: __________
i. Are principals required to disclose contacts?90 
j. Are principals required to disclose major financial contributors?
E2) Lobbyist Disclosure:
a. Are lobbyists required to disclose? If Yes, below: 
b. Are lobbyists required to disclose their address and phone number? 
c. Are lobbyists required to disclose the names of all the principals represented? 
d. Are lobbyists required to disclose the address and phone number of the principals represented? 
e. Are lobbyists required to disclose the nature of the principal’s business (public or private)?
f. What are the required components of a disclosure report? 
  i. Direct lobbying costs (compensation)
ii. Indirect lobbying costs (non-compensation) 
iii. Other costs such as gifts, entertainment, transportation, and lodging
iv. Is the information disclosed in an itemized format (As opposed to an aggregated or lump 
sum amount)?
g. Are lobbyists required to disclose information on the issue lobbied:
i. By the general issues lobbied?
  ii. By the specific bill number or legislation ID?
h. How frequently are lobbyists required to report? 
  i. Monthly?
  ii. Quarterly? 
  iii. Tri-annually (linked with legislative calendar)?
  iv. Semi-Annually?

39
  v. Annually?
  vi. Other: __________
i. Are lobbyists required to disclose contacts?91 
Results of Analysis for State Disclosure Laws
Table 5 contains the overall and specific scores for the analysis of state lobbying disclosure laws. The overall 
results are illustrated in figure 3. Montana received the highest score: 31 out of a possible 37, or 83.8 percent. 
By this analysis, Montana was deemed to maintain the best set of lobbying disclosure laws among the 50 states. 
Other high-performing (ranked) states were Arizona (81.1 percent), South Carolina (78.4 percent), Texas 
(78.4 percent), and Indiana (75.7 percent).
A total of 11 states received scores below 50 percent, indicating a rather poor set of lobbying disclosure laws. 
Perhaps more worrying for those concerned about lobbying disclosure laws was that the average score was 21.9 
out of 37, or 59.3 percent, indicating much room for improvement across most states.
West Virginia and Nevada shared the dubious distinction of ranking last in the country with a score of 11 out 
of 37, or 29.7 percent. Other low-ranking (poorly performing) states included New Hampshire (32.4 percent), 
Maryland (35.1 percent), Kansas (37.8 percent), Oklahoma (37.8 percent), and Wyoming (37.8 percent).

40
Table 5: State Lobbying Disclosure Laws
Who is 
Required to 
Register
(Score of 0-11)
Government 
Exemptions 
(Score of 0-4)
Definition of 
Public Entity 
(Score of 0-1)
Materiality 
Test 
(Score of 0-1)
Lobbying 
Information
Disclosure (Score 
of 0-20)
Overall 
Score
 (0-37)
Score as 
a Percent Rank
Alabama 7 3 0 1 8 19 51.4% 36
Alaska 5 2 0 1 18 26 70.3% 9
Arizona 11 3 1 0 15 30 81.1% 2
Arkansas 6 3 0 1 11 21 56.8% 32
California 6 2 0 1 14 23 62.2% 20
Colorado 8 0 0 1 10 19 51.4% 36
Connecticut 5 1 0 1 17 24 64.9% 18
Delaware 7 3 0 0 11 21 56.8% 32
Florida 10 3 0 0 9 22 59.5% 29
Georgia 6 3 0 1 13 23 62.2% 20
Hawaii 3 3 0 1 16 23 62.2% 20
Idaho 6 3 0 1 13 23 62.2% 20
Illinois 8 3 0 0 16 27 73.0% 6
Indiana 8 3 1 1 15 28 75.7% 5
Iowa 7 3 1 1 10 22 59.5% 29
Kansas 5 2 0 1 6 14 37.8% 44
Kentucky 8 0 0 0 15 23 62.2% 20
Louisiana 6 3 0 0 11 20 54.1% 34
Maine 8 0 0 1 17 26 70.3% 9
Maryland 1 0 0 1 11 13 35.1% 47
Massachusetts 8 3 0 1 14 26 70.3% 9
Michigan 7 3 0 1 15 26 70.3% 9
Minnesota 1 2 0 1 13 17 45.9% 42
Mississippi 10 1 0 1 14 26 70.3% 9
Missouri 7 3 0 1 12 23 62.2% 20
Montana 9 3 0 1 18 31 83.8% 1
Nebraska 8 3 0 0 16 27 73.0% 6
Nevada 5 0 0 0 6 11 29.7% 49
New Hampshire 1 0 0 0 11 12 32.4% 48
New Jersey 1 0 0 1 16 18 48.6% 39
New Mexico 9 2 0 0 13 24 64.9% 18
New York 3 0 0 1 18 22 59.5% 29
North Carolina 6 3 0 1 13 23 62.2% 20
North Dakota 7 3 0 0 7 17 45.9% 42
Ohio 7 2 1 1 15 26 70.3% 9
Oklahoma 6 3 0 0 5 14 37.8% 44
Oregon 7 3 1 1 14 26 70.3% 9
Pennsylvania 8 3 0 0 14 25 67.6% 16
Rhode Island 9 0 0 0 14 23 62.2% 20
South Carolina 10 3 1 1 14 29 78.4% 3
South Dakota 3 1 0 0 14 18 48.6% 39
Tennessee 8 3 0 0 8 19 51.4% 36
Texas 7 3 0 1 18 29 78.4% 3
Utah 6 3 0 0 14 23 62.2% 20
Vermont 8 3 0 1 15 27 73.0% 6
Virginia 6 3 0 1 10 20 54.1% 34
Washington 6 2 0 1 16 25 67.6% 16
West Virginia 1 0 0 1 9 11 29.7% 49
Wisconsin 6 1 0 1 10 18 48.6% 39
Wyoming 7 2 0 0 5 14 37.8% 44
Sources: State lobbying websites; as delineated in Appendix C (References); calculations by the authors.

41
Sources: State lobbying websites; as delineated in Appendix E (References); calculations by the authors.
The overall score is composed of five distinct areas of lobbying disclosure laws: (1) registration, (2) exemptions 
for government, (3) defining public entities, (4) materiality, and (5) disclosure.
(1) Registration
This component examined 11 categories of potential lobbying activity to determine who was required to 
register within each state. The scores ranged from a high of 11 in Arizona to a low of 1 in Maryland, Minne-
sota, New Hampshire, New Jersey, and West Virginia. Specifically, these latter states only require “lobbyists” to 
register while ignoring all other categories of possible lobbyists. The average score (out of 11) for the 50 states 
was 6.4, or a little more than 50 percent.
In terms of private-sector lobbying, which included lobbyists, volunteer lobbyists, principals employing a 
lobbyist, and lobbying firms, the scores varied considerably. All 50 states require lobbyists to register. Only 17 
states, however, require volunteer lobbyists to register, only 24 states require principals to register, and only 17 
states require lobbying firms to register (table 5).
Perhaps more disconcerting given our interest in taxpayer-funded lobbying are the results for public-sector 
entities (questions A5 through A11). The average requirement of the seven categories of public-sector entities 
with the potential to engage in lobbying was 4.2. In other words, on average, states required 4.2 of the seven 
categories of public-sector or taxpayer-funded organizations to register for lobbying activity. 

42
In some cases the exemptions were stark. For instance, only six states require government agencies to register 
when lobbying. Only 31 states include the legislative branch in lobbying registration requirements. Further, 13 
states exempt the governor’s office and the broader executive branch from lobbying registration.
Consider the meaning of these findings: individuals in the 
private sector undertaking lobbying activities are required to 
register and report their activities, while people in the public 
sector (taxpayer-funded) may be exempt even if they are  
completing and pursuing the same lobbying tasks. That 
amounts to a clear double standard in favor of taxpayer- 
funded lobbying.
(2) Exemptions for Government
The second group of questions pertains to exemptions for government agencies and departments. This set 
of questions flows quite naturally from the analysis of who is required to register. A shocking 44 states pro-
vide specific exemptions in their lobbying laws for public agencies and public officials (table5). The common 
response garnered during the research process was that lobbying duties were seen as a “natural” or inherent 
function of public office. What seems to have been missed is that with such exemptions, state governments 
are permitting taxpayer-funded organizations to indulge in lobbying activities without the same transparency 
and thus accountability required for private-sector lobbying. Eighteen states formally indicate in their lobbying 
laws that government agencies are not subject to the same disclosure requirements as private-sector lobbyists 
and principals. The exemption of government and government agencies seems to be an acute problem in states 
like Colorado, Kentucky, Maine, Maryland, Nevada, New Hampshire, New Jersey, New York, Rhode Island, 
and West Virginia, all of which received scores of 0 out of 4 on this measure (table 5).
(3) Defining Public Entities
Only six states’ lobbying laws contain a definition of a public entity (table 5): Arizona, Indiana, Iowa, Ohio, 
Oregon, and South Carolina. A full 88 percent of states, the vast majority, fail to include a definition of public 
entities in their lobbying laws. That indicates a clear need for improvement.
(4) Materiality Test
Thirty-two states provide some type of exemption for small or immaterial lobbying activity. Twenty-seven 
states use a financial or spending threshold, while 13 states rely on a time threshold. Interestingly, California, 
Connecticut, Hawaii, Idaho, Oregon, and Washington use a combination of both tests to exclude small lob-
bying. The 18 states that do not include an exemption for small lobbying activity should review their policies 
to ensure a proper balance between capturing meaningful lobbying activity and avoiding imposing compliance 
costs on small, incidental lobbying activities. However, additional research is needed into the benefits of 
different exemptions—financial and/or time—coupled with greater understanding of lobbying disclosure  
compliance costs.
Eighteen states formally indicate in 
their lobbying laws that government 
agencies are not subject to the same 
disclosure requirements as private-
sector lobbyists and principals. 

43
(5) Information Disclosure
Finally, the heart of the analysis relates to the actual information required to be disclosed by the principal and/
or the lobbyist. In all, the analysis included 20 discrete pieces of information ranging from basic contact infor-
mation to financial reporting to the timeliness of disclosure. Four states tied for the top position with a score of 
18 out of a possible 20: Alaska, Montana, New York, and Texas (table 5). Wyoming and Oklahoma ranked last 
with just 5 out of 20, indicating a sparse requirement for disclosure. Other poorly performing states included 
Kansas (6), Nevada (6), North Dakota (7), Alabama (8), Tennessee (8), and West Virginia (9). The average 
score (out of 20) was 12.7, which indicates a weak performance, on average, for the states’ lobbying disclosure 
requirements.
Accessibility
The final analytical section of the study flows directly from our documentation of the legal disclosure require-
ments imposed on organizations engaged in lobbying across the 50 states. This section builds on those dis-
closure requirements by analyzing ease of access to the information. It is not enough simply to require orga-
nizations to disclose information. A mechanism through which people can easily and anonymously access the 
disclosed information in a timely way is a necessary condition to achieve transparency and thus accountability 
in lobbying. This section empirically measures the extent and ease of accessibility to disclosed lobbying infor-
mation by state.
State Lobbying Information Accessibility Criteria
The following section summarizes and describes the questions, or criteria, used in the analysis.
1) Data availability – At least some lobbying data available (in any format) either by request (email, telephone, 
fax, etc.) or anonymously (web-based).
2) Website existence – The state has a dedicated website for lobbying information.
3) Website identification – How easily a state’s lobbying website can be found.92 
4) Current data availability – At least some current lobbying data/information available on the website for the 
most recent year.
5) Historical data availability – Historical lobbying infor-
mation is available, downloadable, or at least viewable on 
the state’s website.
6) Data format – How easily users can download lobby-
ing data and information and analyze it, and specifically, 
whether users are able to download information in an elec-
tronic format that is immediately useable for analysis, such 
as Excel or SPSS. Such formats require a minimal amount 
Individuals in the private sector  
undertaking lobbying activities are  
required to register and report their 
activities, while people in the public  
sector (taxpayer-funded) may be  
exempt even if they are completing and 
pursuing the same lobbying tasks.

44
of time for adjustments and correction, which allows for speedy analysis of data as well as the ability to sort 
by multiple variables simultaneously.
7) Sorting data – This measure examines whether users can specify data searches on the website using certain 
criteria:
  a) Principal (city, authority hiring, employer, corporation, etc.)
  b) Principal’s location (specific address, city)
  c) Lobbyist name
  d) Lobbyist location (specific address, city)
  e) Specific date
  f ) Specific time period (normally quarter but it depends on how often the law requires  
     data to be disclosed)
  g) Total expenditures
  h) Compensation spending (portion of total expenditures for which the lobbyist is paid back)
  i) Miscellaneous expenses (non-compensation)
  j) Sources of funding (emphasis on public/taxpayer-funded)
  k) Subject of lobbying (or item of legislation)
  l) Designated entities assigned to lobbyist (group/congressman the lobbyist is working for)
  m) Legal status of the principal (government, non-profit, for-profit, etc.)
  n) Sector (transport, energy, banking, education, social services, etc.)
  o) Sub-sector (K–12, secondary, vocational, etc.)
8) Simultaneous sorting – This measure examines the ability of users simultaneously to sort lobbying data by 
multiple criteria.
Questions one through six were scored as 1 (Yes) or 0 (No). The final two questions (7 and 8) were scored on a 
scale of 0 to 15. The result for question 8 was divided by 15 to arrive at a score of 0–1. The overall score of 
each state was then calculated by aggregating the individual scores on a possible scale of 0 to 22. Each ques-
tion was weighted equally.
Results of Analysis
Overall, the scores for accessibility to disclosure information range from a low of 5 (out of a possible 22) in 
Vermont and Wyoming to a high of 17.3 in Connecticut (table 6 and figure 4). Other high-ranking states 
included North Carolina (14.3), Washington (14.3), New Jersey (14.0), and Indiana (13.3). 
The results for accessibility were generally worse than those for lobbying disclosure laws. For example, the av-
erage score was 9.6 out of a possible 22, or 43.6 percent (table 6). Put differently, 32 states or 64 percent failed 
to achieve a score in excess of 50 percent. Both measures indicate a poor performance for most states in allow-
ing access to disclosed lobbying information.

45
Table 6: State Accessibility to Lobbying Disclosure Information
State
Data 
Availability 
(Score 1 
or 0)
Website 
(Score 
1 or 0)
Website 
Identi-
fication 
(Score 1 
or 0)
Current 
Data 
Availability 
(Score 1 
or 0)
Histori-
cal Data 
Availability 
(Score 1 
or 0)
Data 
Format 
(Score 
1 or 0)
Sorting 
Data 
(Score 
0-15)
Simul-
taneous 
Sorting 
(Score 
0-1)
Total 
Score 
(Score 
0-22)
Score 
as a 
Percent Rank
Alabama  1  1  1  1  -    -    3.0  0.1  7.1 32.4% 37
Alaska  1  1  1  1  1  -    7.0  0.1  12.1 55.2% 10
Arizona  1  1  1  1  -    -    4.0  -    8.0 36.4% 31
Arkansas  1  1  1  1  1  -    2.0  -    7.0 31.8% 38
California  1  1  1  1  1  1  5.0  0.2  11.2 50.9% 13
Colorado  1  1  1  1  1  -    6.0  0.2  11.2 50.9% 13
Connecticut  1  1  1  1  1  1  11.0  0.3  17.3 78.5% 1
Delaware  1  1  1  1  1  -    3.0  -    8.0 36.4% 31
Florida  1  1  1  1  1  -    3.0  -    8.0 36.4% 31
Georgia  1  1  1  1  1  1  5.0  0.3  11.3 51.2% 12
Hawaii  1  1  1  1  1  -    2.0  -    7.0 31.8% 38
Idaho  1  1  1  1  1  -    2.0  -    7.0 31.8% 38
Illinois  1  1  1  1  -    -    4.0  -    8.0 36.4% 31
Indiana  1  1  1  1  1  1  7.0  0.3  13.3 60.3% 5
Iowa  1  1  1  1  -    1  5.0  0.3  10.3 46.7% 19
Kansas  1  1  1  1  1  -    5.0  0.1  10.1 46.1% 23
Kentucky  1  1  1  1  -    -    3.0  -    7.0 31.8% 38
Louisiana  1  1  1  1  1  -    5.0  0.2  10.2 46.4% 21
Maine  1  1  1  1 1 1 7 0 13 60.3% 5
Maryland  1  1  1  1 1 0 4 0 9 41.8% 26
Massachusetts  1  1  1  1 1 0 7 0 12 55.2% 10
Michigan  1  1  1  1 1 0 4 0 9 40.9% 28
Minnesota  1  1  1  1 1 0 3 0 8 36.4% 31
Mississippi  1  1  1  1 1 0 2 0 7 31.8% 38
Missouri  1  1  1  1 1 1 6 0 12 55.5% 8
Montana  1  1  1  1 0 1 5 0 10 46.7% 19
Nebraska  1  1  1  1 1 0 6 0 11 50.9% 13
Nevada  1  1  1  1 1 0 4 0 9 40.9% 28
New Hampshire  1  1  1  1 0 0 2 0 6 27.3% 46
New Jersey  1  1  1  1 1 1 8 0 14 63.6% 4
New Mexico  1  1  1  1 1 0 6 0 11 50.0% 18
New York  1  1  1  1 1 0 2 0 7 31.8% 38
North Carolina  1  1  1  1 1 1 8 0 14 64.8% 2
North Dakota  1  1  1  1 1 0 2 0 7 31.8% 38
Ohio  1  1  1  1 0 1 6 0 11 50.9% 13
Oklahoma  1  1  1  1 1 1 4 0 10 46.4% 21
Oregon  1  1  1  1 1 1 3 0 9 41.5% 27
Pennsylvania  1  1  1  1 1 0 7 0 12 55.5% 8
Rhode Island  1  1  1  1 1 0 5 0 10 46.1% 23

46
South Carolina  1  1  1  1 1 1 0 0 6 27.3% 46
South Dakota  1  1  1  1 1 0 4 0 9 42.1% 25
Tennessee  1  1  1  1 1 1 5 0 11 50.9% 13
Texas  1  1  1  1 1 1 6 0 12 55.8% 7
Utah  1  1  1  1 0 0 2 0 6 27.3% 46
Vermont  1  1  1  1 0 0 1 0 5 22.7% 49
Virginia  1  1  1  1 0 0 3 0 7 32.7% 36
Washington  1  1  1  1 1 1 8 0 14 64.8% 2
West Virginia  1  1  1  1 0 0 3 0 7 31.8% 38
Wisconsin  1  1  1  1 1 0 4 0 9 40.9% 28
Wyoming  1  1  1  1 0 0 1 0 5 22.7% 49
Sources: State lobbying websites; as delineated in Appendix C (References); calculations by the authors.
Sources: State lobbying websites; as delineated in Appendix C (References); calculations by the authors.


47
It’s worthwhile to explore some of the specific areas analyzed in the accessibility section. The authors found no 
variance in the performance of the states across the first four criteria: every state received 4 out of 4 on these 
measures of accessibility. Every state makes lobbying data available, maintains a website that is easily found or 
identified, and makes current data available on the website. Thus the differences between the states are ex-
plained by the results in criteria 5 through 8. 
For example, 37 of the 50 states provide historical information while only 17 
provide data in a readily analyzable and downloadable format. This criterion, 
which drives differentiation between the states, is also an area where most 
states can clearly improve their accessibility performance.
A large difference in performance also emerges with respect to sorting or ana-
lyzing disclosure data. The final two questions relate to the ability of users first 
to sort disclosure data by 15 different suggested criteria and then to sort the 
data simultaneously using multiple variables (again 15 are suggested).
The average scores (out of a possible 15) for these two variables were 4.4 and 1.7, respectively. In other words, 
on average, the states allow users to sort lobbying data by 4.4 variables out of a possible 15 and permit the si-
multaneous sorting of only 1.7 variables. The surprising insight here is that while states generally collect much 
of this information, for some reason they make it difficult to sort or analyze the data using these criteria. This 
is particularly true for simultaneous sorting of multiple variables.
 
Comparison of Accessibility Scores with Disclosure-Law Scores
 
Finally, it is helpful to compare and combine the performance of the states across both the lobbying disclosure 
laws and accessibility to gain a better understanding of their overall performance. Table 9 contains summary 
information for the lobbying disclosure laws and accessibility analyses as well as a combined score and rank. 
(The overall scores for the two sections were simply averaged). Figure 5 illustrates the overall scores.
Connecticut ranked first overall with an average score of 71.7 percent. Please recall the nature of this score: 
it means that Connecticut requires a fair amount of the recommended information to be disclosed and then 
facilitates access to that information. Other high-ranking states include Indiana (68.0 percent), Texas (67.1 
percent), Washington (66.2 percent), Maine (65.3 percent), and Montana (65.2 percent).
New Hampshire ranked last overall with a score of 29.9 percent. Other poorly performing (low-ranking) states 
included: Wyoming (30.3 percent), West Virginia (30.8 percent), Nevada (35.3 percent), and Maryland (38.5 
percent). The opposite is true for these states; they tend to require much less information to be disclosed from 
lobbying activity and then perform poorly in making the information available.
Overall, the data from table 7 indicate a marked need for improvement across the board. The top-ranked state, 
Connecticut, scored only 71.7 percent. Twenty-two states failed to achieve a score in excess of 50 percent, and 
the average score was a disappointing 51.5 percent. Regardless of where they ranked, states clearly have room 
for improvement in their lobbying disclosure laws as well as in access to the disclosed information.
While states generally 
collect much of this 
information, for some 
reason they make 
it difficult to sort or 
analyze the data using 
these criteria. 

48
Table 7: Comparison of Results - Disclosure Laws vs. Accessibility
Disclosure Laws  Accessibility Overall (Combined)
Score 
(Out of 37) Percent Rank
Score 
(Out of 22) Percent Rank Average Percent Rank
Alabama 19 51.4% 36  7.1 32.4%  37 41.9% 43
Alaska 26 70.3% 9  12.1 55.2%  10 62.7% 8
Arizona 30 81.1% 2  8.0 36.4%  31 58.7% 14
Arkansas 21 56.8% 32  7.0 31.8%  38 44.3% 39
California 23 62.2% 20  11.2 50.9%  13 56.5% 17
Colorado 19 51.4% 36  11.2 50.9%  13 51.1% 25
Connecticut 24 64.9% 18  17.3 78.5%  1 71.7% 1
Delaware 21 56.8% 32  8.0 36.4%  31 46.6% 34
Florida 22 59.5% 29  8.0 36.4%  31 47.9% 29
Georgia 23 62.2% 20  11.3 51.2%  12 56.7% 16
Hawaii 23 62.2% 20  7.0 31.8%  38 47.0% 31
Idaho 23 62.2% 20  7.0 31.8%  38 47.0% 31
Illinois 27 73.0% 6  8.0 36.4%  31 54.7% 21
Indiana 28 75.7% 5  13.3 60.3%  5 68.0% 2
Iowa 22 59.5% 29  10.3 46.7%  19 53.1% 23
Kansas 14 37.8% 44  10.1 46.1%  23 41.9% 42
Kentucky 23 62.2% 20  7.0 31.8%  38 47.0% 31
Louisiana 20 54.1% 34  10.2 46.4%  21 50.2% 28
Maine 26 70.3% 9  13.3 60.3%  5 65.3% 5
Maryland 13 35.1% 47  9.2 41.8%  26 38.5% 46
Massachusetts 26 70.3% 9  12.1 55.2%  10 62.7% 8
Michigan 26 70.3% 9  9.0 40.9%  28 55.6% 20
Minnesota 17 45.9% 42  8.0 36.4%  31 41.2% 44
Mississippi 26 70.3% 9  7.0 31.8%  38 51.0% 27
Missouri 23 62.2% 20  12.2 55.5%  8 58.8% 13
Montana 31 83.8% 1  10.3 46.7%  19 65.2% 6
Nebraska 27 73.0% 6  11.2 50.9%  13 61.9% 10
Nevada 11 29.7% 49  9.0 40.9%  28 35.3% 47
New Hampshire 12 32.4% 48  6.0 27.3%  46 29.9% 50
New Jersey 18 48.6% 39  14.0 63.6%  4 56.1% 18
New Mexico 24 64.9% 18  11.0 50.0%  18 57.4% 15
New York 22 59.5% 29  7.0 31.8%  38 45.6% 35
North Carolina 23 62.2% 20  14.3 64.8%  2 63.5% 7
North Dakota 17 45.9% 42  7.0 31.8%  38 38.9% 45
Ohio 26 70.3% 9  11.2 50.9%  13 60.6% 12
Oklahoma 14 37.8% 44  10.2 46.4%  21 42.1% 41
Oregon 26 70.3% 9  9.1 41.5%  27 55.9% 19
Pennsylvania 25 67.6% 16  12.2 55.5%  8 61.5% 11
Rhode Island 23 62.2% 20  10.1 46.1%  23 54.1% 22
South Carolina 29 78.4% 3  6.0 27.3%  46 52.8% 24
South Dakota 18 48.6% 39  9.3 42.1%  25 45.4% 36
Tennessee 19 51.4% 36  11.2 50.9%  13 51.1% 25
Texas 29 78.4% 3  12.3 55.8%  7 67.1% 3
Utah 23 62.2% 20  6.0 27.3%  46 44.7% 38
Vermont 27 73.0% 6  5.0 22.7%  49 47.9% 30
Virginia 20 54.1% 34  7.2 32.7%  36 43.4% 40
Washington 25 67.6% 16  14.3 64.8%  2 66.2% 4
West Virginia 11 29.7% 49  7.0 31.8%  38 30.8% 48
Wisconsin 18 48.6% 39  9.0 40.9%  28 44.8% 37
Wyoming 14 37.8% 44  5.0 22.7%  49 30.3% 49
Sources: T ables 5 and 6 with calculations by the authors.

49


50
IV. CONCLUSION AND RECOMMENDATIONS
This paper represents a step forward in our understanding of lobbying, particularly taxpayer-funded lobby-
ing, but it is not a destination. This study confirms the need for additional research and resources to more fully 
understand lobbying, particularly taxpayer-funded lobbying. Our suggestions go beyond this point, with good 
reason. 
The extent of taxpayer-funded lobbying is clearly much more 
widespread than most people perceive it to be. Using Cali-
fornia as a case study, we determined that government and 
related taxpayer-funded lobbying represented nearly one-
quarter (23.8 percent) or one in every four dollars of lobbying 
in the state. It is therefore critical to understand the marked 
differences between lobbying in the private sector and taxpay-
er-funded lobbying. Instead of the current double standard, 
the two sectors should face the same regulations, the same reporting requirements, and the same guidelines for 
conduct. It makes no sense to treat one-quarter of lobbying activity differently because it is taxpayer-funded. 
Indeed, if it were to be treated differently, one would suspect more regulation, not less, given the absence of 
private-sector constraints and discipline.
Every state stands in need of improvement when it comes to its lobbying disclosure laws and accessibility to 
lobbying information. This report illuminates the areas in need of improvement. Even those states that ranked 
high can perform much better. Other states require wholesale changes to their lobbying disclosure laws and/
or accessibility. All states need to work harder at implementing more productive and transparency-inducing 
disclosure laws and accessibility systems.
Instead of the current double  
standard, the two sectors should  
face the same regulations, the same 
reporting requirements, and the  
same guidelines for conduct.

84
ENDNOTES
1  For information on the U.S. Constitution, see http://www.usconstitution.net/const.html. 
2  For an interesting defense of political lobbying, see Joel Jankowsky and Thomas Goldstein. “In Defense of Lobbying,” Wall Street Journal, September 
3, 2009, http://online.wsj.com/article/SB10001424052970203706604574370733538634834.html. 
3  The Washington Post’s Susan Schmidt, James V. Grimaldi, and R. Jeffrey Smith won the Pulitzer Prize for investigative reporting for their series on 
Jack Abramoff, available at http://www.washingtonpost.com/wp-dyn/content/linkset/2005/06/22/LI2005062200936.html. 
4  For example, according to the Washington, D.C.-based Center for Responsive Politics, in 2008, some $3.3 billion was spent on lobbying the federal 
government, with nearly 15,000 people directly employed. See the Center for Responsive Politics, Influence and Lobbying section, http://www.
opensecrets.org/lobby/index.php. 
5  For an interesting discussion of the normalcy and dominance of interest-group lobbying, see David Boaz, “The Lobbyist Scandals,” Pittsburgh 
Tribune-Review, January 15, 2006, available at www.cato.org/pub_display.php?pub_id=5382. 
6  For lobbying-disclosure information for the U.S. House of Representatives, see http://lobbyingdisclosure.house.gov/; For lobbying-disclosure infor-
mation for the U.S. Senate, see http://www.senate.gov/pagelayout/legislative/g_three_sections_with_teasers/lobbyingdisc.htm.
7  See www.opensecrets.org for the Center for Responsive Politics. The Center for Public Integrity (http://www.publicintegrity.org/) also works on 
related issues, particularly disclosure.
8  Quasi-government refers to organizations and entities that are not technically government, but that benefit from government and are distinguished 
characteristically from private-sector firms. For example, firms and organizations granted monopolies by the government, particularly if revenues are 
guaranteed, will behave more like a government organization than a private firm. Examples of these types of organizations include utilities, public-
sector unions, and a host of commissions.
9  See www.dictionary.com; www.merriam-webster.com/; http://dictionary.cambridge.org/; and http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Lobbying for examples of 
the definitions provided for lobbying; Nownes et al. provide a categorization of different types of lobbyists: contract, in-house, volunteer, government, 
and private-individual. They differentiate by sector (government or private) as well as by the status of the lobbyist (contract, in-house, volunteer). See 
Anthony J. Nownes, Clive S. Thomas, and Ronald J. Hrebenar, “Interest Groups in the States,” in Politics in the American States, eds. Virginia Gray 
and Russell L. Hanson (Washington, D.C.: CQ Press, 2008).
10  “The History of the Willard Inter-Continental Washington: The Residence of Presidents,” http://www.washington.intercontinental.com/washa/
pdf/history.pdf; Wikipedia, however, notes earlier references to the term lobbying. For instance, it notes a passage from Deanna Gelak, a former 
president of the American League of Lobbyists, quoting the term “lobbying” in print as early as 1820. See http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Lobbying.
11  James Madison, Federalist No. 10, The Federalist, eds. George W. Carey and James McClellan (Indianapolis: The Liberty Fund), pp. 42–49.
12  One important exception is when organizations, particularly corporations, develop and maintain internal lobbying capacity rather than contract out 
such services. For an examination of the inter-firm/outside contract decisions made by organizations regarding lobbying, see John M. de Figueiredo 
and James J. Kim, “When Do Firms Hire Lobbyists? The Organization of Lobbying at the Federal Communications Commission,” NBER Working 
Paper No. 10553 (Cambridge, MA: National Bureau of Economic Research [NBER], 2004). Available at www.nber.org/papers/w10553.
13  The other key participants in the political marketplace are politicians, bureaucrats, and voters. An area of economics known as public choice analyzes 
the political marketplace and the participants within it based on traditional economic analysis. For further information on both the individual 
participants in the political marketplace and public choice economics more broadly, please see James Buchanan, “Politics Without Romance,” in The 
Collected Works of James Buchanan, Volume 1: The Logical Foundations of Constitutional Liberty (Indianapolis, IN: Liberty Fund, Inc., 1999); William 
Mitchell and Randy Simmons, Beyond Politics: Markets, Welfare, and the Failure of Bureaucracy (Oakland, CA: The Independent Institute, 1994), chap-
ters 2–4. See also Gordon Tullock, Arthur Seldon, and Gordon L. Brady, “The Theory of Public Choice,” in Government Failure: A Primer in Public 
Choice (Washington, D.C.: The Cato Institute, 2002).
14  Madison, Federalist No. 10, 42.
15  James M. Buchanan and Gordon Tullock, “Pressure Groups, Special Interests, and the Constitution,” in The Calculus of Consent: Logical Foundations 
of Constitutional Democracy (Indianapolis: The Liberty Fund, 1999), p. 269.
16  For a broad overview and analysis of interest groups, both in the United States and internationally, please see Clive S. Thomas, ed., Research Guide to 
U.S. and International Interest Groups (Westport, CT: Praeger Publishing, 2004).
17  Buchanan and Tullock, The Calculus of Consent.
18  For an interesting example of the pursuit of narrow interests by lobbyists and a discussion of the returns to organizations (universities) employing 
lobbyists in the post-secondary education sector, see John M. de Figueiredo and Brian S. Silverman, “Academic Earmarks and the Returns to Lobby-
ing,” NBER Working Paper No. 9064 (Cambridge, MA: NBER, July 2002). Available at http://www.nber.org/papers/w9064. 
19  For a more general discussion of lobbying and welfare, see Timothy Besley and Stephen Coate, “Lobbying and Welfare in a Representative De-
mocracy,” The Review of Economic Studies, vol. 68, no. 1 ( January 2001): 67–82. Available at http://www.jstor.org/stable/2695919. For a discussion of 
this phenomenon in the area of tariffs, see William Brock and Stephen Magee, “The Economics of Special Interest Politics: The Case of the Tariff,” 
American Economic Review, vol. 68, no. 2 (1978), Papers and Proceedings of the Ninetieth Annual Meeting of the America Economic Association, 
246–250. For a vivid discussion of blatant rent-seeking in the political arena by corporations, see Kimberley A. Strassel, “Rent-Seekers Inc.,” Wall 
Street Journal, October 2, 2009, http://online.wsj.com/article/SB10001424052748704471504574447291766327588.html.
20  For an important discussion of the link between advocacy spending and actual voting results, see Kristian S. Palda, “The Effect of Expenditure on 
Political Success,” Journal of Law and Economics, vol. 18, no. 3 (December 1975), Economic Analysis of Political Behavior: Universities-National 
Bureau Conferences Series Number 29, pp. 745–771.
21  William Mitchell and Randy Simmons, Beyond Politics: Markets, Welfare, and the Failure of Bureaucracy (Oakland, CA: The Independent Institute, 
1994), p. 62.
22  Buchanan and Tullock, The Calculus of Consent, p. 273.
23  Anthony Downs, “An Economic Theory of Political Action in a Democracy,” Journal of Political Economy, vol. 65, no. 2 (April 1957); and Anthony 
Downs, An Economic Theory of Democracy (New York: Harper & Row, 1957).
24  An enormous number of scholars have taken the initial work on interest groups and extended its depth and breadth. For instance, Sam Peltzman, 
“Toward a More General Theory of Regulation,” NBER Working Paper No. 133 (Cambridge, MA: NBER, 1976), examines interest groups within 
the field of regulations in order to develop a more general understanding of regulations and the regulatory environment. Similarly, William Niskanen 
in Bureaucracy and Representative Government (Chicago, IL: 1971) explored bureaucracies and government, including the role of interest groups. 
25  Part of this recognition and increasing concern was most certainly initiated by Mancur Olson’s watershed publication of The Logic of Collective Action 

85
(1969). Among a number of important insights, Olson showed that it was relatively easy to organize a small group of interests when the rewards or 
costs were large, and inversely, it was difficult to organize groups when the benefits or costs were small. See Mancur Olson, The Logic of Collective 
Action (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1969).
26  Buchanan and Tullock, The Calculus of Consent.
27  Gary S. Becker, “A Theory of Competition among Pressure Groups for Political Influence,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, vol. 98, no. 3 (August 
1983), pp. 371–399; For an interesting examination of competing interest groups and how they affect government, see Yael V. Hochberg, Paola Sa-
pienza, and Annette Vissing-Jorgensen, “A Lobbying Approach to Evaluating the Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002,” NBER Working Paper No. 12952 
(Cambridge, MA: NBER, 2007). Available at http://www.nber.org/papers/w12952.
28  Becker, “A Theory of Competition among Pressure Groups for Political Influence,” p. 372.
29  Ibid., pp. 371–399.
30  Ibid. 
31  For information on the resource or budget constraints of firms, both private and public, see János Kornai, Eric Maskin, and Gerard Roland, “Un-
derstanding the Soft Budget Constraint,” Journal of Economic Literature, vol. XLI (December 2003): 1095–1136. For a summary of the research on 
budget constraints, see Jason Clemens, “János Kornai and Budget Constraints,” Fraser Forum (Vancouver, BC: The Fraser Institute, April 2004), 
20–21. Available at http://www.fraserinstitute.org/Commerce.Web/product_files/Apr04ffKornai.pdf. 
32  For information on the resource or budget constraints of firms, both private and public, see Kornai, Maskin, and Roland, “Understanding the Soft 
Budget Constraint.” For a summary of the research on budget constraints, see Clemens, “János Kornai and Budget Constraints.” 
33  James T. Bennett and Thomas J. DiLorenzo, Destroying Democracy: How Government Funds Partisan Politics (Washington, D.C.: The Cato Institute, 
1985).
34  James T. Bennett and Thomas DiLorenzo, “How (and Why) Congress Twists Its Own Arm: The Political Economy of Tax-Funded Politics,” Public 
Choice, vol. 55, no. 3 (October 1987), pp.199–213.
35  Ibid., p. 205. 
36  A review of both books appeared in the academic journal Public Choice in 2000. See William F. Shughart II, Public Choice, vol. 102 (2000): 382–386.
37  James T. Bennett and Thomas DiLorenzo, CancerScam: Diversion of Federal Cancer Funds to Politics (New Brunswick, NJ: Transaction Publishers, 
1998).
38  James T. Bennett and Thomas DiLorenzo, The Food and Drink Police: American’s Nannies, Busybodies and Petty Tyrants (New Brunswick, NJ: Transac-
tion Publishers, 1998).
39  James T. Bennett, Tax-Funded Politics (New Brunswick, NJ: Transaction Publishers, 2004).
40  For a detailed case study of this phenomenon, see John Samples, Christopher Yablonski, and Ivan G. Osorio, More Government for All: How Tax-
payers Subsidize Anti-Tax Cut Advocacy, Policy Analysis no. 407 (Washington, D.C.: The Cato Institute, 2001). Available at http://www.cato.org/
pub_display.php?pub_id=1266. 
41  For more information about the Goldwater Institute, see www.goldwaterinstitute.org; Benjamin Barr, Your Tax Dollars at Work: The Implications of 
Taxpayer-Funded Lobbying, Policy Report No. 217 (Phoenix: The Goldwater Institute, January 23, 2007). Available at http://www.goldwaterinstitute.
org/article/1952. 
42  Ibid., appendices A through D.
43  Ibid., executive summary and pages 17–19. 
44  Ibid. 
45  Ibid. 
46  For a discussion regarding the other side of the Barr argument, restricting private monies and relying on taxpayer-funded resources within political 
campaigns, see Yeon-Koo Che and Ian L. Gale, “Caps on Political Lobbying,” The American Economic Review, vol. 88, no. 3 ( June 1998): 643–651; 
and Bradley A. Smith, “Some Problems with Taxpayer-Funded Political Campaigns,” University of Pennsylvania Law Review, vol. 148, no. 2 (De-
cember 1999), pp. 591–628.
47  For more information about the Americans for Prosperity Foundation, see http://www.americansforprosperity.org/national-site; Phil Kerpen, 
“Taxpayer-Funded Lobbying: Runaway Government Growth” (Washington, D.C.: Americans for Prosperity Foundation, December 2008). Avail-
able at www.americansforprosperity.org/files/PolicyPaperTFL2008.pdf.
48  Ibid., p. 1. Please note that the report incorrectly calculated the percentage increase from 1998 to 2008 as 151 percent when it was actually 161 
percent.
49  Ibid., p. 2.
50  The study is available in several sections on the Center for Public Integrity website at http://projects.publicintegrity.org/hiredguns/nationwide.aspx. 
51  In all, eight distinct areas of disclosure were examined: (1) Definition of Lobbyist, (2) Individual Registration, (3) Individual Spending Disclosure, 
(4) Employer Spending Disclosure, (5) Electronic Filing, (6) Public Access, (7) Enforcement, and (8) Revolving Door Provision.
52  Different questions received different weighting based on the scores assigned. This creates a bias toward those questions in calculating the overall 
scores. For example, questions with a Yes/No response were given a score of 0 for No and 3 for Yes. Questions with answers that occurred over a 
range of possibilities were allocated scores ranging from 0 to 5.
53  For more information on the methodology used by the Center for Public Integrity on its Hired Guns study, see http://projects.publicintegrity.org/
hiredguns/default.aspx?act=methodology. 
54  States that received scores in excess of 70 were Washington (87), Kentucky (79), South Carolina (75), Connecticut (75), New York (74), Wisconsin 
(73), Massachusetts (73), California (71), and Utah (70).
55  For information regarding how the federal government’s lobbying disclosure laws compared to the states’, see http://projects.publicintegrity.org/
hiredguns/report.aspx?aid=167. 
56  The Common Cause – Pennsylvania study is available at http://www.commoncause.org/atf/cf/%7BFB3C17E2-CDD1-4DF6-92BE-
BD4429893665%7D/LobbyLawFull.doc. 
57  Information about Common Cause is available at http://www.commoncause.org/site/pp.asp?c=dkLNK1MQIwG&b=4741359. 
58  See Office of the Secretary of State, Political Reform Division, Cal-Access, User’s Manual, July 20, 2009 version. Available at http://www.sos.
ca.gov/prd/users_manual3.pdf; The National Conference of State Legislatures maintains a user-friendly website that summarizes a variety of aspects 
of lobbying laws across the 50 states, including disclosure and reporting requirements. The directory of material available as of October 12, 2009, is 
available at http://www.ncsl.org/Home/SearchResults/tabid/702/Default.aspx?zoom_query=Lobbying. 
59  Please see the second part of section III of this paper on lobbying disclosure accessibility.
60  Information about the Secretary of State in California is available at http://www.sos.ca.gov/. 

86
61  It is important to recognize that this section and the analysis contained in it rely on lobbying expenditures as a proxy for overall lobbying. There are 
admittedly aspects of lobbying that are not properly or adequately captured in current lobbying-expenditure data. However, spending on lobbying 
activities is generally accepted as a reasonable and sufficient proxy for overall lobbying.
62  The National Conference of State Legislatures maintains a thorough directory of legal definitions for lobbying and lobbyists for all the states. See 
National Conference of State Legislatures, “Ethics: How States Define ‘Lobbying’ and ‘Lobbyist’” (accessed October 12, 2009 and effective as of 
March 2008). Available at http://www.ncsl.org/default.aspx?tabid=15344.
63   Ibid; The lobbyist definition also specifies conditions for appearing before the Public Utilities Commission: “a proceeding before the Public Utilities 
Commission constitutes ‘administrative action’ if it meets any of the definitions set forth in subdivision (b) or (c) of Section 82002. However, a com-
munication made for the purpose of influencing this type of Public Utilities Commission proceeding is not within subdivision (a) if the communica-
tion is made at a public hearing, public workshop or other public forum that is part of the proceeding, or if the communication is included in the 
official record of the proceeding.” Ibid.
64  The California Secretary of State Lobbying website is available at http://cal-access.ss.ca.gov/Lobbying/.
65  Information on state-level lobbying by the Government category is available at http://cal-access.ss.ca.gov/Lobbying/Employers/List.aspx?view=detail
&id=40305&session=2007 (accessed October 1, 2009).
66  Information on state-level lobbying included in the Miscellaneous category is available at http://cal-access.ss.ca.gov/Lobbying/Employers/List.aspx?v
iew=detail&id=40312&session=2007 (accessed October 2, 2009).
67  Some of the preliminary work completed on this paper by Mr. Tim Wolfe argued strongly for the creation and adoption of a quasi-government 
category, which would have included organizations that receive special treatment or dispensation from government that advantages and distinguishes 
them from similar private-sector organizations.
68  The category of Health was also examined; however, it was determined that the number and importance of potential taxpayer-funded organizations 
was quite limited.
69  Information on state-level lobbying included in the Education category is available at http://cal-access.ss.ca.gov/Lobbying/Employers/List.aspx?vie
w=detail&id=40302&session=2007 (accessed October 2, 2009).
70  The authors readily admit that one could make a case that California’s experience with taxpayer-funded lobbying is anomalous and not representa-
tive of the general experience in the other states. However, as the analysis in sections III (disclosure laws) and IV (accessibility) will show, one of the 
major challenges to better understanding and thus regulating lobbying activities at the state level is the dearth of information and lack of accessibility 
to the limited amount of information available.
71  Available at www.opensecrets.org; For more information on the methodology and processes used by the Center for Responsive Politics, see http://
www.opensecrets.org/lobby/methodology.php. 
72  See the Overview section on the Open Secrets website, available at http://www.opensecrets.org/lobby/index.php. 
73  Lobbying data classified and ranked according to the 20 industries used by the Center for Responsive Politics are available at http://www.opense-
crets.org/lobby/top.php?indexType=i. 
74  Individual records for Civil Servants and Public Officials lobbying spending for 2008 are available at http://www.opensecrets.org/lobby/indusclient.
php?year=2008&lname=W03&id. 
75  Daniel Kaufmann, “Rethinking Governance: Empirical Lessons Challenge Orthodoxy,” discussion draft (Washington, D.C.: World Bank, March 
11, 2003). Available at http://www.worldbank.org/wbi/governance/wp-transparency.html. 
76  Roumeen Islam, “Do More Transparent Governments Govern Better?” World Bank Policy Researching Working Paper 3077 (Washington, D.C.: 
World Bank, 2003). Available at: http://econ.worldbank.org/external/default/main?pagePK=64165259&theSitePK=469372&piPK=64165421&men
uPK=64166093&entityID=000094946_03062104301553; Please note that there is acknowledged potential in this study for some confusion regard-
ing the flow of causation. 
77  Simeon Djankov, Rafael La Porta, Florencio Lopez-de-Silanes, and Andrei Shleifer, “Disclosure by Politicians,” NBER Working Paper No. 14703 
(Cambridge, MA: NBER, February 2009). Available at http://www.nber.org/papers/w14703. The study looked at rules and practices of financial 
and conflict disclosure by politicians in 175 countries. Roughly two thirds of the countries maintained some type of disclosure laws, but less than 
one third were required to disclose information to the public. Critically for the purposes of this study, the authors concluded that disclosure was cor-
related with lower perceived corruption in the public sector.
78  See, for example, World Bank, Anticorruption in Transition: A Contribution to the Policy Debate.
(Washington, D.C.: The World Bank, 2000); and United States Agency for International Development (USAID), A Handbook on Fighting Corruption, 
Technical Publication Series PN-ACE-070 (Washington, D.C.: Center for Democracy and Governance, Bureau for Global Programs, Field Sup-
port, and Research, USAID, February 2009); One of the scholars who reviewed this paper argued, and continues to suggest, that the causation runs 
in the opposite direction. That is, instead of transparency promoting good government and reducing corruption, the reviewer believes that transpar-
ency is an outcome of these practices. That is, good government and the absence or minimization of corruption leads governments to be transparent, 
not the other way around.
79  Daniel Kaufmann, Rethinking Governance: Empirical Lessons Challenge Orthodoxy. Available at http://www.worldbank.org/wbi/governance/wp-trans-
parency.html. 
80  Specifically, the following states submitted changes (presented in order by date received): Washington, Rhode Island, South Dakota, Nevada, Kan-
sas, Alabama, Maine, Minnesota, Alaska, Delaware, California, Oregon, Vermont, Hawaii, Indiana, Louisiana, Nebraska, Colorado, South Carolina, 
Montana, Wisconsin, Texas, New Mexico, New Jersey, Ohio, New York, Connecticut, Maryland, Kentucky, Wyoming, New Hampshire, Arizona, 
West Virginia, and Virginia.
81  The three states were Vermont, Nebraska, and Texas; Thankfully, two of the three states indicated that they had “briefly reviewed” the analysis and 
that it “seemed correct and reflective of state laws.”
82  A number of states (e.g., South Dakota and Nevada) requested changes that reduced their scores. Please note that the methodology for assessing 
state performances was included in the correspondence sent to state officials.
83  There were some exceptions to requested changes. For instance, Washington State requested a change from No to Yes for question E1(j), which 
relates to the disclosure of financial contributors to principals. Washington State does require principals that are membership-based to disclose mem-
bers who contribute in excess of $500. This was deemed too narrow a requirement to meet the threshold for a “Yes” on this question.
84  The National Conference of State Legislatures (NCSL) maintains a website with links to all of the state’s lobbying laws and related information. 
See National Conference of State Legislatures, Links to States’ Legislative Ethics and Lobbying Laws (accessed October 15, 2009; data effective as 
of February 2008). Available at http://www.ncsl.org/default.aspx?tabid=15352. 
85  Note that the positive answer to this question is “no” whereas it is “yes” to all other questions.
86  Note that the positive answer to this question is “no” whereas it is “yes” to all other questions.

87
87  Note to Question E: some states require both principals and lobbyists to register and disclose information. For the purposes of comparative analysis, 
we took the higher score of the principal or lobbyist section when both were required to disclose information. The complete data for both principals 
and lobbyists is available in appendix A.
88  The authors readily acknowledge the potential problem of additional and material compliance costs imposed by this double reporting. However, the 
analysis indicated that there were clear benefits from the double reporting of financial expenditures and legislation identification by both the princi-
pal and lobbyist. It is hoped that sufficient data regarding lobbying and compliance costs will be collected in the future in order to allow for a more 
definitive analysis of the costs and benefits of double reporting.
89  We readily acknowledge that increased frequency of reporting means increased disclosure costs for those covered by the disclosure requirements. 
Unfortunately, there is simply not enough data to ascertain whether the benefits from increased disclosure offset or exceed the costs associated with 
increased compliance costs. Indeed, one of the insights of this study is that we simply do not know enough about state-level lobbying, its benefits, 
and its costs.
90  “Contacts” refers to the state entities with which each lobbyist has been engaged or designated to lobby; it includes the legislature, state agencies, 
boards, commissions, or councils.
91  “Contacts” refers to the state entities with which each lobbyist has been engaged or designated to lobby; it includes the legislature, state agencies, 
boards, commissions, or councils.
92  The ease of finding a state’s lobbying website was determined by entering the state name along with the term “lobbying” in a Google search. The 
state received an affirmative score if the state website appeared on the first page of results.

88

89
ABOUT THE AUTHORS
Jason Clemens is the Director of Research at the Pacific Research Institute. Prior to joining PRI he held a 
number of positions at the Canadian-based Fraser Institute over a ten-plus year period, including the Director 
of Research Quality, Resident Scholar in Fiscal studies, and the Director of Strategic Planning and Budgeting. 
He earned an Honors Bachelors Degree of Commerce and a Masters’ Degree in Business Administration from 
the University of Windsor as well as a Post Baccalaureate Degree in Economics from Simon Fraser University.
He has published more than 50 major studies on a wide range of topics including taxation, government spend-
ing, labor market regulation, banking, welfare reform, productivity, entrepreneurship, public choice economics, 
and economic prosperity. He has published over 200 shorter articles, which have appeared in such newspapers 
as the Wall Street Journal, Investors Business Daily, The National Post, Globe & Mail, and all major daily papers 
in Canada as well as in major U.S. papers and on websites such as the Washington Post, Los Angeles Daily News, 
San Francisco Chronicle, San Diego Union-Tribune, Detroit Free Press, Detroit News, Pittsburgh Tribune-Review, 
Sacramento Bee, Human Events, Townhall.com, and the Flash Report. Mr. Clemens has been a guest on nu-
merous radio and television programs across Canada and the United States, including ABC News. He has 
appeared before committees of both the House of Commons and the Senate in Canada as an expert witness 
and has briefed state legislators in California. In 2006, he received the prestigious Canada’s Top 40 Under 40 
award, presented by Caldwell Partners, as well as an Odyssey Award from the University of Windsor.
Julie Kaszton is a Research Intern at the Pacific Research Institute. She graduated from the University of 
California, Los Angeles, with a B.A. in International Affairs with an emphasis in political science. Prior to her 
work at PRI, she interned for National Geographic in the Education Programs department and was a research 
and development assistant for Common Sense Media. She was also chosen to participate in the prestigious 
UCLA Community of American Politics and Public Policy internship and research program in Washington, 
D.C. 
Karrie Rufer was a Research Intern at the Pacific Research Institute in the summer of 2009. Karrie earned 
a Masters in Economics from San Jose State University and is currently completing a Masters in Business 
Administration at Saint Mary’s College. Prior to her work at PRI, she was a Ciocca Fellow at the Mercatus 
Center in Arlington, Virginia, and worked as a research assistant to professor Tyler Cowen.
Laura Sucheski was a Research Intern at the Pacific Research Institute in the summer of 2009. She is a third-
year student at Claremont McKenna College, where she is studying Government and California Politics. Dur-
ing the school term she is a research assistant at the Salvatori Center for the Study of Individual Freedom in 
the Modern World in Claremont, CA. Prior to her work at PRI, she interned at the Sacramento lobbying firm 
Kahl-Pownall Public Affairs and was a research assistant for professor Kenneth P . Miller’s forthcoming book 
Direct Democracy and the Courts.

90
STATEMENT OF RESEARCH QUALITY
 
The Pacific Research Institute is committed to accurate research and, to that end, submits all new PRI  
studies for review by a minimum of two researchers with expertise in the subject area, including a minimum  
of one external expert. To adjudicate any unresolved difference, deemed reasonable and substantive, between  
an author(s) and a reviewer, PRI maintains a Research Review Board (RRB). The RRB has final and  
determinative authority, and includes the following scholars:
Professor Robert Barro, Harvard University
Professor William Boyes, Arizona State University
Professor Steve Globerman, Western Washington University
Professor Jay Greene, University of Arkansas
Professor James Gwartney, Florida State University
Professor Eric A. Hanushek, Stanford University
Professor David Henderson, Naval Postgraduate School (Monterey)
Dr. W. Lee Hoskins, former president, Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland (retired)
Professor Ronald W. Jones, University of Rochester
Professor Lynne Kiesling, Northwestern University
Professor Edward Lopez, San Jose State University
Professor Ross McKitrick, University of Guelph (Canada)
Professor Sandra Peart (Dean), University of Richmond
Professor David Schmidtz, University of Arizona
Professor Paul Zak, Claremont Graduate University
As part of its commitment, the Institute guarantees that all original factual data are true and correct to the best 
of our knowledge and that information attributed to other sources is accurately represented. If the veracity of 
any material fact or reference to an independent source is questioned and brought to the Institute’s attention 
with supporting evidence, the Institute will respond in writing. If an error exists, it will be noted on the In-
stitute website and in all subsequent distribution of the publication, which constitutes the complete and final 
remedy under this guarantee.

91
ABOUT THE PACIFIC RESEARCH INSTITUTE
 
The Pacific Research Institute champions freedom, opportunity, and personal responsibility by advancing 
free-market policy solutions. It provides practical solutions for the policy issues that impact the daily lives of 
all Americans, and demonstrates why the free market is more effective than the government at providing the 
important results we all seek: good schools, quality health care, a clean environment, and a robust economy.
Founded in 1979 and based in San Francisco, PRI is a non-profit, non-partisan organization supported by  
private contributions. Its activities include publications, public events, media commentary, community  
leadership, legislative testimony, and academic outreach.
Education Studies 
PRI works to restore to all parents the basic right to choose the best educational opportunities for their chil-
dren. Through research and grassroots outreach, PRI promotes parental choice in education, high academic 
standards, teacher quality, charter schools, and school-finance reform.
Business and Economic Studies
PRI shows how the entrepreneurial spirit—the engine of economic growth and opportunity—is stifled by 
onerous taxes, regulations, and lawsuits. It advances policy reforms that promote a robust economy, consumer 
choice, and innovation.
Health Care Studies 
PRI proposes market-based reforms that would improve affordability, access, quality, and consumer choice. 
PRI also demonstrates why a single-payer, Canadian model would be detrimental to the health care of all 
Americans.
Technology Studies 
PRI advances policies to defend individual liberty, foster high-tech growth and innovation, and 
limit regulation.
Environmental Studies
PRI reveals the dramatic and long-term trend toward a cleaner, healthier environment. It also examines and 
promotes the essential ingredients for abundant resources and environmental quality: property rights, markets, 
local action, and private initiative.

www.pacificresearch.org