November 2016




A STRUCTURAL
PROBLEM IN THE
SHADOWS
Lobbying by banks in the Netherlands




                                       1
    Colophon
    TITLE A structural problem in the shadows
    SUBTITLE Lobbying by banks in the Netherlands
    November 2016

    AUTHOR Myriam Vander Stichele (SOMO)
    ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS Special thanks to Sam van Dijck and Frans Bieckmann who provided
    valuable research support
    COPY EDITOR Leigh Chambers
    LAYOUT Karen Paalman, Getlos
    ILLUSTRATIONS Joep Bertrams
    PRINT Drukkerij Raddraaier, Amsterdam
    ISBN 97-894-6207-1100

    This publication is supported by a grant from the Open Society Foundation.
    The content of this publication is the sole responsibility of SOMO and can in no way be taken to
    reflect the views of the Open Society Foundation.

    PUBLISHED BY




    Stichting Onderzoek Multinationale Ondernemingen
    Centre for Research on Multinational Corporations

    Sarphatistraat 30                   + 31 (20) 6391291
    1018 GL Amsterdam                   info@somo.nl
    The Netherlands                     www.somo.nl

    The Centre for Research on Multinational Corporations (SOMO) is an independent, not-for-profit research and network or-
    ganisation working on social, ecological and economic issues related to sustainable development. The organisation has been
    investigating multinational corporations and the consequences of their activities for people and the environment around the
    world since 1973.




2   A STRUCTURAL PROBLEM IN THE SHADOWS
Table of contents




Preface
Why lobbying the financial legislative process is of concern             4

Introduction
How this report came about                                               7

Frequently used abbreviations                                           10

Chapter 1
A citizen’s perspective about transparency at the Ministry of Finance   11

Chapter 2
The invisible threads linking banks and the Ministry of Finance         25

Chapter 3
How are Dutch banks organising their influence on bank reforms?         35

Chapter 4
Unawareness about banks’ membership of multiple industry associations   45

Chapter 5
Conclusions                                                             52

Chapter 6
Recommendations                                                         57

Abreviations of financial industry associations                         65




                                                                         3
               Preface

               WHY LOBBYING THE
               FINANCIAL LEGISLATIVE
               PROCESS IS OF CONCERN
               Regulatory capture and the financial crisis
deregulation Much of the 2007-2008 financial crisis that impacted so negatively on the economy, jobs and soci-
resulting from ety, was attributed to the effects of so-called ‘light touch’ laws that resulted in deregulation of the
lobbbying      financial sector. These laws and regulations, developed and decided by policy makers and financial
               authorities, promoted the huge profit-making and corporate interests of banks above the financial
               stability of the economy and the interests of society as a whole. The deregulation was the end re-
               sult of intensive lobbying by representatives of the financial sector working in concert with a small
               circle of legislators, regulators and policy makers, away from public scrutiny. When lobbying such
               as this takes place in a non-transparent way by industry representatives and succeeds in influenc-
               ing how that industry is regulated so that it serves its narrow or private corporate interests, this is
               known as regulatory capture.1


               Too-big-to-regulate
too little     Following the ‘crash’ there emerged a political will to reform the sector by introducing tighter, en-
change         forceable laws and regulations. Many experts suggest2, however, that financial reforms introduced
               post-2008 have not significantly changed either the financial sector or the behaviour of those who
               work in it. The total Dutch banks’ balance sheet for example, still accounts for four times the eco-
               nomy of the Netherlands3 while the so-called ‘too-big-to-fail’ banks still cause financial instability
               within Europe. Lobbying by the large banks has also continued and may even have increased, and
               the decision-making process regarding financial legislation has stayed more or less the same, with
               little public involvement. Unsurprisingly, perhaps, public trust in the Dutch financial sector remains
               very low.4

reforms pre-   Because the financial sector is complex, legislators are dependent on expertise of the financial in-
vented by      dustry to help develop reforms but this leaves them vulnerable to prioritising the interests of the
lobbying       sector at the expense of the public interest. The former Director of the Dutch Financial Markets
               Authority (AFM) admitted that the government gave the Dutch Banking Association (De Neder-
               landse Vereniging van Banken) too much influence over the decision-making process on financial
               reform.5 The sector is still highly concentrated and complex, able to generate large incomes and
               profits and is regulated in a way that is not open to public scrutiny – all conditions and characteris-
               tics conducive to regulatory capture.


               Attempts at improving transparency and accountability
no adequate    While financial law makers might value the expertise and lobbying of those working in, and on be-
scrutiny       half of, the financial sector, throughout the legislative process, the communications between the
               two parties are not always transparent. Without real openness the public may fear that their inter-
               ests are being compromised in favour of those in the financial industry who have privileged influ-
               ence and access to those in power. Indeed, media coverage has highlighted incidents where direct
               lobbying by banks has unduly influenced Dutch legislation.6 Despite such reports and coverage, the
               decision-making process on financial reform in the Netherlands is still not adequately scrutinised
               and analysed.

4              A STRUCTURAL PROBLEM IN THE SHADOWS
more trans-   In 2010, the parliamentary Commissie De Wit found, during its investigations into the financial cri-
parency       sis, that more transparency was required to avoid a repeat of regulatory capture.7 It was not until
needed        August 2016, however, that the Minister of Finance issued concrete guidelines and policies which
              applied to the Ministry of Finance and the external contacts with which it works.8

legislation on Lobbying activity in other countries is covered by legislation (Austria, France and the US, for exam-
lobbying       ple) and institutions with the power of enforcement (Canada9). No laws or binding regulations apply
               to lobbying activities in the Netherlands; the only official requirement is that just one person per
               company or organisation is allowed to register for an access pass to parliament.

Dutch pro-    At the end of 2015, two members of parliament (MPs), Bouwmeester and Oosenbrug, proposed
posals on     that lobbying and the legislative decision-making process be more transparent and accountable in
lobbying      order to avoid undue influence being exerted by those with privileged access to decision-makers.
              These safeguards would, they argued, protect the interests of citizens and ensure their views were
              represented.10 This proposal to develop rules and guidelines – not necessarily laws - was followed
              by a parliamentary motion11 requiring the government to introduce a legislative footprint (lobby
              paragraaf) which would be attached to all legislative proposals. The current government has indicat-
              ed that it will make changes to the way legislative proposals are presented but did not publish an
              official response before end of October 2016.

EU rules     There have been heated discussions at EU level on the legislation required to both protect the
to increase  public interest (e.g. health, climate change, etc.), and control undue lobbying and privileged access
transparency to decision-makers, thereby preventing a situation conducive to regulatory capture. As a result,
             attempts have been made to increase transparency: lobbyists and organisations intervening at EU
             institutions are asked to register and submit information to the European Transparency Register
             and agree a code of conduct. In addition, from September 2016 onwards, those wishing to have
             access to high level policy makers have to subscribe to the Transparency Register.12 The diaries of
             all Commissioners and the Director-Generals are also being published and include information on
             who has been met and regarding what issue.

aim of this   This report focuses on financial legislative processes in the Netherlands and whether measures
report        should be - or have been - taken to improve the transparency and accountability of the lobbying
              processes, so as to prevent regulatory capture and guarantee that financial law making is democra-
              tic, open, balanced and in the public interest.




              Notes

              1   R. van Tilburg, I. Römgens, Taking Lobbying Public - The        klantbelang meer gediend’, press release, 3 Octo-
                  Transparency of Dutch Banks Lobbying Activities,                ber 2016, https://www.nvb.nl/nieuws/2016/6507/
                  SOMO, December 2013, https://www.somo.nl/nl/ta-                 vertrouwensmonitor-banken-vertrouwen-in-sector-sta-
                  king-lobbying-public/ (last viewed 17 September 2016).          biel-maar-laag-in-eigen-bank-hoger-klantbelang-meer-
              2   See for instance: J. Ferreiro, C. Gómez, and J. Land-           gediend.html (viewed 7 October 2016).
                  eta, ‘Impacts of Financialisation on Society, Environment   5   R. van Tilburg, I. Römgens, Taking Lobbying Public,
                  and Economy - A Delphi study on the future of finance’,         SOMO, December 2013, p. 24.
                  presented at FESSUD Annual Conference 2015 Lisbon,          6   See for instance: C. Driessen, ‘De bank vraagt, de
                  15-17 October 2015, http://fessud.eu/wp-content/                minister draait - Minister reserveerde met hulp van ING
                  uploads/2015/11/FESSUD_DelphiStudy_Lisbon-2015.                 fiscaal voordeel voor alleen banken’, NRC Handelsblad, 3
                  pdf (viewed 28 September 2016): gives a survey of               November 2015, https://www.nrc.nl/
                  opinions of 49 leading experts.                                 nieuws/2015/11/03/de-bank-vraagt-de-minister-
              3   DBA/NVB, Catshuisberaad banken, 23 May 2016,                    draait-a1405681 (viewed 4 November 2016); ‘DNB en
                  p.7: it was six times the Dutch economy before the              banken te innig’, Trouw, 4 February 2013, http://
                  financial crisis.                                               www.trouw.nl/tr/nl/4504/Economie/article/de-
              4   DBA/NVB, ‘Vertrouwensmonitor banken: vertrouwen                 tail/3388095/2013/02/04/DNB-en-banken-te-innig.
                  in sector stabiel maar laag, in eigen bank hoger;               dhtml (viewed 17 Septem- ber 2016).



                                                                                                                                         5
    7   Tweede Kamer, Parlementair onderzoek financieel stelsel     9   Office of the Commissioner of Canada, https://lob-
        - Rapport, 10 May 2010, https://zoek.officielebekend-           bycanada.gc.ca/eic/site/012.nsf/eng/h_00000.html (last
        makingen.nl/kst-31980-4.html (last viewed 17 Septem-            viewed 10 October 2016); R. Van Tilburg, I. Römgens,
        ber 2016): Recommendation nr. 18: ‘De commissie                 Taking Lobbying Public, SOMO, December 2013, p. 36.
        beveelt de Kamer aan om de mogelijkheden te onder-          10 Tweede Kamer, Initiatiefnota van de leden Bouwmeester
        zoeken om de invloed van belanghebbenden op de                  en Oosenbrug: “Lobby in daglicht: luisteren en laten
        inhoud en totstandkoming van wet- en regelgeving                zien”, Kamerstuk 34376, blg-650569, 24 December
        transparanter te maken. In dat verband zou een systeem          2015, https://zoek.officielebekendmakingen.nl/kst--
        van «legislative footprint», een systeem waarbij de             34376-2.html (last viewed 10 October 2016).
        wetgever aangeeft welke actoren op welke wijze betrok-      11 Tweede Kamer, Gewijzigde motie van de leden Van
        ken zijn geweest bij de opstelling van regulering, kunnen       Gerven en Oosenbrug (t.v.v. 32637, nr. 229) over toe-
        worden onderzocht.” In responding to the recommenda-            voegen van een lobbyparagraaf, Kamerstuk 32 637, Nr.
        tions, the government stressed the importance of invol-         232, 1 March 2016, https://www.tweedekamer.
        ving society in the development of new laws and regula-         nl/kamerstukken/moties/detail?id=2016Z04139&
        tions.                                                          did=2016D08601 (last viewed 7 October 2016).
    8   Ministerie van Financiën, Gedragslijn Externe contacten,    12 European Commission, Proposal for a Interinstitutional
        29 August 2016, https://www.rijksoverheid.nl/documen-           Agreement on a mandatory Transparency Register, COM
        ten/richtlijnen/2016/08/29/gedragslijn-externe-contac-          (2016) 627 final and Annexes, 28 September 2016, htt-
        ten-ministerie-van-financien (viewed 30 August).                ps://ec.europa.eu/transparency/regdoc/rep/1/2016/
                                                                        EN/1-2016-627-EN-F1-1.PDF (viewed 30 September
                                                                        2016).




6   A STRUCTURAL PROBLEM IN THE SHADOWS
                Introduction

                HOW THIS REPORT CAME
                ABOUT
                Contents of the report
six Dutch       This SOMO report examines particular aspects of how lobbying works in the banking sector in the
banks           Netherlands, how transparent and accountable it is for example, and whether it affects the public
                interest. It focuses specifically on decision-making processes for new or reviewed financial laws
                and related interactions between the Dutch Ministry of Finance and six Dutch banks: ABN AMRO,
                ING, Rabobank, Triodos Bank, SNS Bank and its subsidiary ASN Bank1.

                • Chapter one examines how transparent the Ministry of Finance is to citizens wishing to know
                  about, and influence, upcoming financial legislation.
                • Chapter two provides an insight into the interaction between the Ministry and Dutch banks re-
                  garding financial legislative proposals, and related lobbying by the banks.
                • Chapter three explains how the banks operationalise their lobbying activities.
                • Chapter four highlights how multiple memberships of industry associations is not well managed
                  by the banks.


                Focus and aim of this report
decision-       The focus of this report is the decision-making process on upcoming financial laws from the view-
making on       points of both by Ministry of Finance, and six Dutch banks including an examination of their lobby-
proposals for   ing activities. This report builds on a previous SOMO report published in 2013 which assessed the
law             transparency of six Dutch banks – ABN AMRO, ING, Rabobank, Triodos Bank, SNS Bank and the
                then independent ASN Bank. It builds on 2015 research undertaken by Transparency International
                Nederland that concluded that political decision-making processes in the Netherlands at the time
                had little protection against the risks of undue influence from stakeholders and corruption.

financial and   For this report, SOMO investigated how Dutch banks structure and organise themselves to interact
banking laws    and lobby with the Ministry of Finance while financial legislative proposals are being discussed and
                decided. The broad range of financial laws is not the focus of this report but legislative processes
                referred to in this report are those to reform the financial sector following the 2008 crisis. These
                include legal requirements on banks to hold higher robust capital buffers to better withstand finan-
                cial crises, regulations for integer management of investment funds offered by banks, and obliga-
                tions that prevent misleading information given to clients on complex and risky financial products.

assessing    The report assesses whether transparency about lobbying activities compared to how it was fol-
transparency lowing the publication of the 2013 SOMO report on bank lobbying, and whether conditions still
             prevail for a repeat of regulatory capture.

different as-   Specifically throughout this report processes and practices by the Ministry of Finance and the six
pects of this   banks are examined and assessed and reviewed with regard to:
report          • Transparency. Are they transparent enough to protect the right to know?
                • Openness to citizen input. Are there sufficient opportunities for citizens to provide input into
                  the financial legislative process to protect their right to be heard?
                • Equality of access. How is the bank lobbying organised and does it result in privileged access to
                  legislators and undue influence over the financial legislative process? Is there still equality of
                  access for citizens and civil society that protects the integrity of the democratic process?




                                                                                                                       7
               • Balance and public interest. How are the interests of citizens and the interests of the financial
                 sector weighed by the Ministry of Finance and the banks? Is it done in a way that protects the
                 public interest?
               • Accountability. Is there information and debates about decisions made by the Minister of
                 Finance to protect the right to democratic processes? Who makes the final decision in banks
                 on lobbying positions and activities? How accountable are the banks for their lobbying and
                 positions?


               Methodology used for this report
qualitative    The research for this report has been qualitative and was mainly conducted through desk research
research       and interviews with staff in the public affairs units, or other bank representatives, at ABN AMRO,
               ING, Rabobank, Triodos Bank, SNS Bank and its subsidiary, ASN Bank. Since there is very little writ-
               ten about how the banks organise their lobbying internally, the lobbying operations were examined
               with regard to:
               • How they were organised;
               • Whether they were transparent;
               • Whether they were subject to policy and/or codes of conduct;
               • Who took the final decision and was accountable for the lobbying;
               • How they interacted with the Ministry of Finance.

details per    The research and interviews with each of the banks is reflected in the annexes that are attached
bank in an-    separately to this report on SOMO’s website (https://www.somo.nl/topic/financial-sector). An inter-
nexees         view was also conducted with the Dutch Banking Association/Nederlandse Vereniging van Banken
               (DBA/NVB).

only written   The Ministry of Finance did not accord an interview but gave written answers to questions submit-
answers        ted, in writing, by SOMO. All the banks as well as the DBA/NVB replied when given the opportuni-
               ty to review the research findings but the report and its conclusions remain SOMO’s responsibility.
               The Ministry of Finance had no capacity to review chapters 1 and 2 submitted to it.2

no Wob         No specific access to information requests (‘Wob’ request in Dutch) were made to the Ministry of
information    Finance but some of the previous information made available through such requests was used.

case study on As a case study to examine the lobbying activities of banks and the decision making process at the
securitisation Ministry of Finance, this report uses the EU legislative proposal for simple, transparent and stand-
               ardised (STS) securitisation; the decision-making on this issue began in 2015. The securitisation of
               loans was at the heart of the 2007/2008 financial crisis and was subject to corporate capture in
               the Netherlands before the crisis.3

limitations of Due to limited resources, not all aspects about lobbying could be investigated. This report does
this report    therefore not deal with:
               • Decision making at parliament level which is also subject to lobbying and external inputs, and
                 influences the proposals made by the Ministry of Finance;
               • Interaction with, and lobbying of, the Dutch Central Bank and other Dutch supervisors who
                 enforce adopted laws, but can be active at international level to initiate standards for financial
                 legislation;
               • Lobbying by banks of the other Dutch Ministries;
               • ‘Revolving doors’, i.e. job switching between the financial sector, the lobbying industry and the
                 ministries or the parliament;
               • Payments to political parties;
               • Informal, personal, private encounters and networks.




8              A STRUCTURAL PROBLEM IN THE SHADOWS
              Defining lobbying
influencing   Although there are many different definitions, meanings and explanations of the term ‘lobbying’4
              (even amongst industry associations of lobbying), the term is used in this report to describe all
              methods used to influence political decision-makers about particular issues of interest to banks.
              This includes responding to official consultations on future legislative proposals.

interaction   This report also refers to ‘interaction’ between government officials and bank staff/management
              because lobbying activities or access to legislators is easier if there has been previous interac-
              tion. It means, for example, that lobbyists or representatives of the bank know the right person to
              contact on a particular issue, are able to monitor upcoming legislation and share expertise on the
              banks operation and interests with government officials.



              Notes
              1   Note: ASN Bank is part of SNS Bank and discussed
                  separately in this report as it acts independently regar-
                  ding lobbying and has an independent bank permit.
                  From January 2017 onwards, ASN Bank and SNS Bank
                  are part of de Volksbank N.V. with one banking permit.
              2   C. Gelinck, Spokesperson Ministry of Finance, email to
                  M. Vander Stichele, Senior Researcher SOMO, 12 Octo-
                  ber 2016.
              3   R. van Tilburg, I. Römgens, Taking Lobbying Public,
                  SOMO, December 2013, p. 24.
              4   Transparency international uses the following definition:
                  ‘Any direct or indirect communication with public
                  officials, political decision-makers or representatives
                  for the purposes of influencing public decision-making
                  carried out by or on behalf of any organised group.’
                  (Source: Transparency International - Nederland, Lifting
                  the lid on lobbying – Enhancing the trust in public de-
                  cision-making in the Netherlands, 2015, p. 11, http://
                  www.transparency.nl/wp-content/uploads/2015/04/
                  Lifting-the-Lid-on-Lobbying-Enhancing-Trust-in-Public-
                  Decision-making-in-the-Netherlands.pdf (last viewed 10
                  October 2016)).




                                                                                                                    9
     Frequently used abbreviations

     IAK: guidelines for the Dutch government how to identify, balance and weigh different stakehol-
     ders when writing proposals for legislation. In Dutch: Integraal afwegingskader voor beleid en regel-
     geving.

     BNC-fiche: briefing paper by the Dutch government in a standard format that informs and assesses
     new (legislative) proposals by the European commission. In Dutch: Beoordeling Nieuwe Commis-
     sievoorstellen.

     DBA/NVB: Dutch Banking Association/Nederlandse Vereniging van Banken

     DG FISMA: Directorate-General for Financial Stability, Financial Services and Capital Markets Un-
     ion of the European Commission

     EC: European Commission

     ECOFIN: Council of the Ministers of Finance of the European Union

     EP: European Parliament (EP)

     MPs: members of parliament

     Wob request: request for access to government information according to a process that is based
     on the open government act, in Dutch: Wet Openbaarheid van Bestuur (1991).

     STS securitisation: simple, transparent and standardised securitisation.

     Clarifications
     Memorie van Toelichting: a standardised document that accompanies legislative proposals from
     government, which explains different aspects of the proposed legislation according to existing
     guidelines.


10   A STRUCTURAL PROBLEM IN THE SHADOWS
Chapter 1

A CITIZEN’S PERSPECTIVE
ABOUT TRANSPARENCY AT
THE MINISTRY OF FINANCE




                          11
               Introduction
               Why citizens should be involved

impact on      Financial legislation that regulates banks affects not only how the banks operate but also how
society        they impact on the economy, society and individual citizens. If citizens and civil society groups are
               informed and able to provide input into banking and financial legislation initiated by the Ministry
               of Finance, they can argue in favour of the public interest and citizens’ interests, which may be
               contrary to the arguments put forward by the banks which promote their interests. Such public
               scrutiny and input diminishes the potential for regulatory capture at the Ministry, a process that
               precludes public interests from being integrated into financial laws.

a citizen’s    To start with, a citizen has to know the national and EU financial legislative decision-making pro-
perspective    cesses with which the Ministry is involved. Based on that information, a citizen can hold, or devel-
               op, an opinion that he/she wants to communicate to the Ministry, or perhaps start a public debate.
               In order to be able to provide input at the right time, citizens must know the stages and the timings
               of the decision making processes and what access channels are open to him/her to provide input
               to the Ministry. In addition, in order to assess the fairness of the Ministry’s decision-making, a
               citizen must know what opinions have been provided by other parties, such as the financial sector
               lobby, and how accountable the minister is to parliament on what interests have been taken into
               account.

questions to   This chapter therefore examines from a citizen perspective:
be asked       • What open public information is available for citizens from the Ministry about the decision-
                 making process on national and EU legislation in which the Ministry of Finance is involved?
               • What are the official channels and possibilities for citizens to provide an input?
               • What information is available about external parties providing input to, and lobbying, the
                 Ministry?
               • How transparent is the Ministry about the weighing and balancing of inputs and interests, and
                 how the interests of citizens and the public interest have been protected or prioritised?

               The Ministry’s mandate and decision-making process

Dutch and EU Following the financial crisis of 2008, many current national laws to reform the financial sector
laws         are based on EU laws which are either EU “directives” that need to be integrated into national law
             through the parliament, or EU “regulations” that are decided at EU level and directly applicable to
             member states.

Minister’s     The responsibilities of the Ministry of Finance regarding financial legislation differ from nation-
responsibility al level to EU level. On European legislation, the Dutch Minister of Finance co-decides at the
               EU Council of Ministers of Finance (ECOFIN), after the European Commission has exercised its
               mandate to initiate legislation. The ECOFIN chair then negotiates a final text with the European
               Parliament which has also co-decision making power (see box). At the Dutch level1, the Ministry
               can propose to parliament new Dutch financial legislation and changes to existing laws, or submit
               EU ‘directives’, which become law after being presented and approved by both the Lower House
               (Tweede Kamer) and the Senate (Eerste Kamer).
               When these national and EU decision-making process are transparent, it enables citizens to judge
               whether the Ministry is representing the interests of all stakeholders - including the public interest.




12             A STRUCTURAL PROBLEM IN THE SHADOWS
box 1          EUROPEAN FINANCIAL LEGISLATION – THE DECISION MAKING PROCESS

               Only the European Commission (EC) – specifically at the responsibility of the Directorate-General
               for Financial Stability, Financial Services and Capital Markets Union (DG FISMA) - has the mandate
               to initiate financial legislation.

               The EU Council of Ministers of Finance (ECOFIN), which includes the Dutch Minister of Finance, as
               well as the European Parliament (EP) can only request the EC to initiate policies or laws.

               The EC (DG FISMA) consults before deciding on new financial legislative proposals via the public
               internet consultations, public hearings and informal contacts. The Dutch Ministry of Finance some-
               times responds to the EC’s internet consultations.

               The EC presents final legislative proposals to ECOFIN and the EP, who respond and make decisions
               on amendments separately. Each Minister of Finance has weighed co-decision making power at
               ECOFIN about these amendments to the EC proposals. The Dutch Minister of Finance consults
               and discusses with the Dutch parliament about the content and outcomes of ECOFIN meetings
               and decisions on legislative proposals.

               The proposed amendments are then discussed behind closed doors by the presidency of the ECO-
               FIN and the EP. Following these discussions, the text – usually a compromise between the EP and
               the ECOFIN - becomes law after it is approved by the EP and the EU Council of Ministers and is
               published in the official EU journal.

               Lobbying can take place at all stages of the decision-making process.




            Governmental frameworks and guidelines for
            transparency
citizens’   What rights do Dutch citizens have when the Ministry of Finance develops and decides on financial
rights      legislative proposals? A few overall governmental policies, guidelines, rules and laws encourage
            transparency and access for citizens, and balanced legislation by Ministries. In addition, there are
            specific policies and rules applicable to the Ministry of Finance, designed to protect the public in-
            terest.

            Overall government policy and obligations

            Specific guidelines and policies on openness of information and balancing of interests with regard
            to legislation apply to all Ministries:

            • The Dutch Constitution embeds in Article 110 the right to access to information by stating that
              ‘government bodies shall observe the right of public access to information in accordance with
              rules to be prescribed by an act of parliament.’2

            • The Public Access to Government Information Act (Wet openbaarheid bestuur (Wob)) established
              in 1991, aims to implement Article 110 and open up public administration by allowing anyone to
              apply for information from Ministries on specific issues.3 A ministry must reply to all requests,
              and – if no limitations apply – release documents or information, redacted or in full.4

            • Several governmental guidelines instruct how ministries should write legislative proposals.5
              According to such an official instruction (Aanwijzingen voor de Regelgeving6), an explanatory docu-
              ment - Memorie van Toelichting - has to accompany each legislative proposal sent to parliament.
              In a standard format, the document should explain different aspects of the legislation, including


                                                                                                                    13
                  its potential impact on businesses and citizens. It should explain how the guidelines (Integraal
                  afwegingskader beleid en regelgeving (IAK)) on identifying, balancing and weighing the interests
                  and powers (krachtenveldanalyse) of different stakeholders have been implemented and contain
                  information on what advice and consultations have taken place.7 If a Ministry concludes that the
                  rights and duties of citizens, companies and institutions will be significantly affected by legisla-
                  tion, a draft legislative proposal should be presented for public (internet) consultation via the
                  government’s website and have a document that explains how the IAK guidelines have been
                  applied.8 When a final legislative proposal is sent to the parliament, the ‘consultation paragraph’9
                  in the Memorie van Toelichting should explain, in general terms, how the Ministry has weighed
                  the consultation responses and whether they were integrated into the legislative proposal.10

                • The policy of the cabinet of ministers headed by Prime Minister Rutte is for more open govern-
                  ment, including transparent decision-making, active distribution of information, and openness to
                  input and initiatives from the public.11

                • All civil servants in contact with external persons are subject to guidelines12 on integrity, as sum-
                  marised in the Gedragscode Integriteit Rijk (2015). These guidelines advise on avoiding conflicts
                  of interest, participating in seminars and conferences, and handling information and external
                  communications.

implementa-     The aforementioned policies, guidelines and laws are in place to ensure that citizens have the right
tion of right   to access information, including through public internet consultation, and to achieve good qual-
to know         ity and balanced legislation. How these guidelines are implemented should be transparent in the
                Memorie van Toelichting that complements the legislative proposal. There are, however, no specific
                guidelines on transparency about lobbying or for civil servants dealing with lobbyists.

proposal for    In order to improve openness and accountability about lobbying and how lobby interests are
improved        weighed compared to those of citizens, two members of parliament (see Preface: Initiatiefnota Lob-
openness        by in daglicht)13 made a proposal in December 2015, supported by parliament. As at end October
                2016, the government’s only response has been to indicate it wants to adapt the Aanwijzingen voor
                de Regelgeving so that the Memorie of Toelichting be expanded and cover more explicitly what inputs
                have been received from lobbyists and public consultations, and how these have been dealt with in
                the legislative proposal.14

                Additional guidelines and policies influencing the Ministry of Finance

post crisis The parliamentary investigation into the causes of the 2008 financial crisis (Commissie De Wit) rec-
recommenda- ommended in 2010 that the Ministry of Finance be more transparent about influence exerted from
tion        interested parties (belanghebbenden). It also proposed the development of a so-called ‘legislative
            footprint’ to identify which external parties have been involved in what way in the legislative pro-
            cess.15

new guide-      Only in August 2016 did the Minister issue ‘guidelines on external contacts’16 covering for example
lines by        procedures on how civil servants should deal with lobbyists. The guidelines instruct that all draft
Ministry of     legislative proposals which affect the financial sector should be subject to internet consultation and
Finance         that industry associations responding to such consultations should be encouraged not to respond
                anonymously. They also make it mandatory that a ‘legislative footprint’ (lobby paragraaf) be added
                to all kind of legislation and governmental measures for their execution. The legislative footprint
                should give details about inputs received, also outside the official internet consultation.

policy and     The Minister of Finance, Mr. Jeroen Dijsselbloem, has stated he is in favour of openness about the
responsibility financial legislative process and his own activities.17 He values external input into the legislative de-
               cision making process as a contribution to both the viability and effectiveness of implementation.18
               He recognises that the Minister has to take responsiblity for assessing how the public interest is
               best served in legislative proposals.19




14              A STRUCTURAL PROBLEM IN THE SHADOWS
               So how transparent are the processes to propose financial
               laws for citizens?
website not    The Ministry of Finance’s website is not particularly helpful or informative for citizens searching
very helpful   for information on upcoming legislation aimed at reforming and regulating the financial sector. It
               gives an overview of general topics20 such as ‘financial reforms’21 but does not provide an overview
               of the issues currently being legislated. Nevertheless, citizens can use other government websites
               as well as the Ministry’s own site – both are fully interconnected – to search for all documents is-
               sued by the Ministry, which are immediately made publically accessible. By using a range of search
               filters, information on upcoming financial legislation should be found on several specific govern-
               mental website22 but, in practice the websites provide only a partial23 overview of national and EU
               financial legislation currently being prepared, open for consultation or ready to be implemented in
               the near future.

searching      Since information about upcoming financial legislation is not easily found on the Ministry’s website,
the right      citizens have to know what national and/or EU financial legislation is being developed and pro-
documents      posed. Using search filters with key terms of a particular future law, however, all related documents
               issued by the Ministry of Finance are publicly accessible to citizens via government websites. If a
               draft legislative proposal is published for an internet consultation, an opportunity is provided to
               scrutinise a draft text that is already quite developed. Each new EU legislative proposal from the
               EC, on which the Minister of Finance has to co-decide at ECOFIN, is presented and explained in a
               so-called ‘BNC-fiche’24 (Beoordeling Nieuwe Commissievoorstellen). It includes a short impact assess-
               ment of the financial and juridical consequences, as well as the impact on businesses and citizens,
               of such legislation. This BNC-fiche is the Ministry of Finance’s starting point for future discussions
               in Brussels and briefly clarifies the Ministry’s position to the domestic parliament, though it does
               not contain any information on the external inputs or lobby positions received. This BNC-fiche is,
               however, not easy to find among the many documents sent to parliament, and is not updated.

parliamentary All documents sent from the Minister of Finance to the Dutch parliament are published, including
documents     written Q&As, and letters which announce new legislation and explain how it will be developed 25
              (Aankondiging van de voorgenomen maatregel26). Citizens can consult the parliament’s website for
              reports on discussions between members of parliament (MPs) and the Minister of Finance, which
              might, for example, clarify how the Minister weighed the different interests in forming a conclusion
              on a legislative proposal.

social media   The aforementioned documents, debates in the Dutch parliament, press conferences and other
               events are also announced through press releases, automatic email announcements27, social media
               (i.e. the twitter accounts of the Minister @J_Dijsselbloem and the Ministry @Financien), and other
               social media which are not found on the Ministry’s website28 or which require the user to have a
               personal account (e.g. LinkedIn). Some, but not all29, official speeches of the Minister of Finance can
               be found through formal search filters on the government website. Speeches can provide citizens
               with some insight into the Ministers’ opinions or contacts with the financial sector (e.g. when giv-
               ing speeches at a conference organised by a financial industry association).

skills for     Citizens need quite some skill to find and monitor all the available documentation on a particular
analysis       legislative issue and the related decision making by the Ministry of Finance. Keeping up with the
               analysis of a particular legislative proposal that is discussed in different documents - many of which
               are lengthy and technical – can be time consuming. Moreover, the availability of such material de-
               pends on the Ministry providing parliament with full information in a timely fashion.30

Wob request    In order to have more information, a citizen can submit an access to information (Wob) request or
               search the government’s website (filter ‘Wob-verzoek’31) for information released through a Wob
               request. Correspondence by the Ministry of Finance, made available in this way is the most in-
               formative compared to other public documents (even if some details, such as names, are redacted)
               about discussions held with external parties and how banks, financial industry associations etc. are
               lobbying for a particular position.

                                                                                                                   15
                How and when can citizens give input on future financial
                laws?
diversity of    According to the governmental guidelines on writing legislative proposals, the Ministry of Finance
stakeholders    has to take into account the interests of different stakeholders. Because citizens will be impacted
                by financial laws, there should be opportunities available for citizens and civil society organisations
                to give their perspective on future financial laws and provide arguments in favour of the public
                interest.

official con-   The main official channel for input that citizens can use is the public internet consultations issued
sultation       by the Ministry of Finance (these did not happen routinely until the September 2016 new guide-
                lines issued by the Ministry). There are no announcements of such consultations that can be easily
                found on the Ministry’s website. Citizens have to proactively search for official internet consulta-
                tions using a range of filters (via: www.internetconsultatie.nl) or monitoring press releases, or be
                already subscribed to alerts about internet consultations (www.internetconsultatie.nl/voorkeur-
                abonnement) to find out when a financial legislative proposal can be commented on by the public.
                The Ministry does not seem to attempt to reach out to affected citizens or informed civil society
                organisations. Such public internet consultations invite comments on drafted, new or reviewed na-
                tional legislation, some of which might integrate EU directives that allow for flexibility in national
                interpretation and implementation. No particular questions are addressed to citizens.

informal con- The consultation documents contain a rather elaborate draft law and the Memorie van Toelichting
sultations    includes quite technical explanations about different aspects and impacts of the future law. It does
              not contain information about who has already given input or been consulted prior to the official
              internet consultation.

lack of access Citizens can also give their opinions using other official access formats (via internet) although there
channels       is no guarantee whether they will be taken into account. It is not transparent whether there are
               other consultation mechanisms, such as advisory groups to which, for instance, civil society organi-
               sations promoting the public interest could be invited.


                Finding out about input and lobbying by the banks and
                others
counter-        Citizens who are informed about the range of comments and arguments given to the Ministry by
balancing       other interested parties on future financial legislation, can better put forward arguments that coun-
the banking     terbalance positions that unduly favour the financial sector. Additionally, by finding out when and
sector          how the financial sector and others influence and lobby, citizens can assess whether they are given
                equal opportunities to put forward their positions.

responses to The Ministry of Finance does not publicise any information about external inputs, lobbying or ad-
consultations vice it requested and received prior to the public internet consultation. The first opportunity for
              citizens to see such information is when the responses to the consultations are published on the
              Ministry’s website. Even then, this is only if the party concerned is willing to have its response
              published, though this is now encouraged by the Ministry. Such responses already start to be made
              public during the consultation period.32

paragraph on The most public and standardised information by the Ministry about external views given during
consultation the development of a legislative process, is the particular paragraph (consultatie en advies) which,
and advice   according to governmental guidelines, needs to be included in the Memorie van toelichting that ac-
             companies the final legislative proposal. This means such information about external influence is
             only made public once the legislative proposal is finalised and submitted to parliament. Moreover,
             the information provided is brief and limited, often focussing on responses received via the official
             internet consultation. From September 2016 onwards, this paragraph is to be expanded by the


16              A STRUCTURAL PROBLEM IN THE SHADOWS
              Ministry of Finance to become a more comprehensive so-called ‘legislative footprint’33 with infor-
              mation about the various contacts with external parties.

beyond for-   There are several circumstances in which external influences on the legislative process are hardly
mal consulta- or not transparent to citizens, namely when no consultations are issued, the Memorie van toelichting
tions         provides little information, or the BNC-fiche lacks such information, which is for instance the case
              for EU proposals for a ‘regulation’. Other information channels can be used to find out whether and
              how the Minister might have been influenced such as his public diary34 and his tweets, which pub-
              licise his contacts and appointments outside the Ministry, though they give no information on the
              persons met or the content of meetings.

transparency So far, only information received from access to information (Wob) requests provide a detailed and
not adequate thorough insight into the various formal and informal contacts that different staff members of the
             Ministry have with external parties and how lobbying takes place (see also chapter 2).35 This means
             that the information made available in standardised ways by the Ministry is not adequate for citi-
             zens to monitor whether excessive lobbying or regulatory capture take place.


              Can citizens know how their interests are being fairly
              taken into account?
political     Even if the Ministry of Finance receives a great deal of external inputs, influencing and lobbying,
choices       what matters for citizens is whether the choices made during the decision-making process result
              in a balanced final legislative proposal that integrates or gives priority to the public interest and
              citizens’ concerns. The Minister of Finance is the one who is accountable for the decisions taken
              based on external input.36

weighing of    According to existing guidelines and practices, the main formal document issued routinely by the
diverse inter- Ministry which makes transparent how external inputs have been weighed and balanced in financial
ests           legislative proposals is the Memorie of Toelichting. The paragraph included in the Memorie of Toelich-
               ting about consultation and advice gives a short explanation of how input from official internet
               consultations has or has not been integrated. The paragraph on how the Ministry judges the impact
               of a potential law on citizens, as well as businesses, should give citizens an indication whether and
               how the Ministry has applied the governmental guidelines for balanced and integer legislative pro-
               cesses (Integraal afwegingskader beleid en regelgeving, IAK: explained above). Until now the Memorie
               of Toelichting did not much clarify the methodology used or what the public interest might mean in
               the context of the new law. Reports and documents about the Ministers responses to parliamenta-
               ry questions on the issue are able to publicise more information on these issues.

no guarantee Citizens therefore have neither comprehensive information nor an explicit guarantee that their
             positions are being properly heard and weighed, let alone balanced or given priority over corporate
             interests.


              Testing transparency: the case study about STS
              securitisation
example for   In order to judge the means for citizen information and participation, this reports uses a concrete
testing       example of a new law proposed at EU level, on which the Minister of Finance had to co-decide.
              Once the whole decision-making process is over, the EU law on STS securitisation will become
              Dutch law. This case will look at how the above mentioned information channels will inform citi-
              zens about the decision-making process on this legislative proposal.




                                                                                                                      17
              Introducing STS securitisation and the EU decision-making process

EU legislative In September 2015, the EC proposed an EU law to allow and regulate simple, transparent and
proposal       standardised (STS) securitisation (see box). This proposal was launched at the same time as the
               Action Plan to create a Capital Markets Union (CMU). Prior to this launch, a written internet consul-
               tation had been opened between 18 February and 13 May 2015.37 By mid December 2015, ECO-
               FIN had decided its position on the legislative proposal38 but by end October 2016 the proposal
               was still being disputed at the Economic and Monetary Affairs Committee (ECON) in the European
               Parliament and no amendments to the legal proposals were yet decided.39 Once ECON finalises
               its amendments, negotiations between ECON and ECOFIN will begin. The final compromised legal
               text is therefore not expected in 2016. This final law will be an EU ‘regulation’ that is directly appli-
               cable in Dutch law.



box 2             WHAT IS SECURITISATION AND WHY IS IT MADE SIMPLE, TRANSPARENT AND
                  STANDARDISED (STS)?

                  Securitisation means that loans provided by banks or other financial institutions can be packaged
                  and transformed into financial products, such as investment funds. Investors can buy shares in
                  these funds. Such securitisation allows banks to take the packaged loans off their balance sheet
                  and make new loans.

                  Those who buy securitised products should receive income from these loans; in case the borrower
                  is unable to pay, collateral should be available. The 2007 US financial crisis - that spilled into the
                  EU in 2008 – was caused by securitised bad or even fraudulent sub-prime mortgage loans that
                  could not be repaid and the value of the houses mortgaged returned insufficient collateral. Conse-
                  quently, the securitised products became worthless and globally interconnected banks also holding
                  such securitised products had payment problems; the resulting lack of trust in the large banks trig-
                  gered a credit crisis and a financial crisis.

                  To avoid the problems caused by securitised sub-prime mortgages it is argued that securitised
                  products be kept simple, transparent and standardised (STS). It is claimed that this will encourage
                  finances to flow to small businesses and the economy. Nevertheless, introducing STS securitisa-
                  tion has been criticised, e.g. for re-introducing risks into the financial system, and it is questioned
                  whether the EU law will simplify, standardise and make the securitised financial products transpar-
                  ent.




              How can citizens know about the legislative process on STS securitisation?

availability of Since the Ministry of Finance website has no heading on STS securitisation and upcoming EU legis-
documents       lation, citizens have to know about this issue and try out different search terms on the webpages of
                the Ministry/government and the Dutch parliament to find out about the Ministry’s decision-mak-
                ing process. Such a search results in quite technical and lengthy documents that often also cover
                other topics. They include the Ministry of Finance’s response to the EC consultation and questions
                by Dutch parliamentarians, the BNC-fiche introducing the EC proposed legislation on STS securiti-
                sation and the Minister’s position, and research documents to which the Ministry refers (the one of
                the Dutch Central Bank was made public after ECOFIN had already made a decision). The public di-
                ary (not available in 2015) and the speeches of the Minister do not provide any further information.

position on   There is little information about the decision-making process within the ECOFIN and the Minister’s
the EU pro-   position during the different stages of the EU deliberations. The BNC-fiche gives no update on the
cess          Ministry’s position and whether it has changed through parliamentary debates, ECOFIN meetings,
              or lobbying, etc. From the available documents it is clear that the Ministry of Finance is in favour




18            A STRUCTURAL PROBLEM IN THE SHADOWS
                  of the STS securitisation proposals, believing it will have a positive effect, and only has a few crit-
                  ical observations (e.g. that more attention needs to be paid to how supervision will be organised).
                  Overall, there is no simplified information that allows citizens to be easily aware about this poten-
                  tial EU regulation.

                  What possibilities do citizens have to influence legislation on STS securitisation?

no citizen’s      There has been no formal public internet consultation by the Ministry of Finance before it submit-
input             ted its response to the EC consultation nor before the Minister took a co-decision on amendments
                  at ECOFIN in December 2015. The reason might be that the final EU legal text on STS securitisa-
                  tion will be a ‘regulation’, which will become Dutch law without changes by the Dutch parliament.

no alert to       There was also very little public indication by the Ministry that there was an EC public internet con-
citizens          sultation on the future STS securitisation law. It was only mentioned in documents provided to the
                  Dutch Parliament in March 201540 in which the Minister announced that the Ministry itself would
                  respond.

other com-        The only route left for citizens to communicate concerns to the Ministry about this EU legislation
munication        is through the standardised official contact point41 or other formal (e.g. a letter) or informal (e.g.
                  participating in public debates attended by the Minister or Ministry officials) channels. There is, of
                  course, no guarantee that the Ministry would respond positively to such contact and input.42

                  Did external parties give input to the Ministry?

source of         Citizens can find out from available information that the Ministry based its position on STS securi-
inspiration       tisation on documents from the EC, the European Banking Authority (EBA), the European Central
                  Bank, international financial institutions (such as the Bank of International Settlements) and per-
                  haps on academic research.43 There is no information available to citizens on what input was given
                  by the private sector or whether lobbying took place.

                  Overall, there is not sufficient clear information for citizens to assess if, how and when the Ministry
                  was influenced.

                  How has the Ministry of Finance weighed and protected the public interest?

risks for citi-   In the case of STS securitisation, the instruments available to safeguard the interests of the public
zens ignored      and citizens resulted in very little information being made available by the Ministry. The BNC-fiche
                  states that there will be no financial impact or extra regulatory burdens for citizens.44 It does not,
                  however, explain how this judgement was made. The mapping of interests and powers (krachten-
                  veld) in the BNC-fiche gives no information on how far citizens and households are able to be in-
                  formed or respond to the proposal, for example to protect them against the risks of new STS secu-
                  ritisation. The main argument by the Ministry, that varied forms of access to finance will benefit the
                  economy in general along with small and medium sized enterprises (SMEs), is little substantiated.45
                  Rather, in its response to the EC consultation on STS securitisation, the Ministry urged that more
                  attention be paid to removing impediments of STS securitisation loans to SMEs.46

                  From this example, the lack of input possibilities for citizens appears to have resulted in their inter-
                  ests and concerns being barely taken into account, if not altogether ignored.




                                                                                                                       19
     Conclusions from a citizen’s perspective
     For citizens who want to know about new financial legislation that regulates and reforms the finan-
     cial sector, be heard, and ensure that the public interest is protected from undue influences exert-
     ed on the Ministry of Finance, the following can be concluded.

     Poor transparency for citizens does not respect the right to know

     Although citizens have the constitutional right to have access to information about the deci-
     sion-making process on financial legislative proposals, the information made available by the
     Ministry of Finance is difficult to find and mostly too technical to monitor or analyse. Instruments
     of transparency, such as the Memorie van toelichting that goes with national legislative proposals,
     are not sufficiently comprehensive about the potential impacts of legislation on citizens or about
     external inputs received into the decision-making process, such as lobbying. Though the Minister
     of Finance is one of the few Dutch ministers who makes his diary (‘agenda’) public, it does not dis-
     close all meetings or subjects covered in meetings. Documents released after a request for access
     to information (Wob) provide the most informative insight on the decision-making process. Making
     a Wob request, however, is a lengthy procedure not always appropriate for citizens.

     Being knowledgeable about upcoming financial legislation at EU level is even more difficult for
     citizens. EU laws are very important to Dutch citizens because they include major reforms that will
     become Dutch law directly (in the case of ‘regulations’) or after voting in the Dutch parliament (in
     the case of directives). The Minister of Finance co-decides on EU laws but accessible up to date
     information about his position is not provided by the Ministry.

     The current inadequate transparency about legislative processes means that citizens can in practice
     hardly monitor or raise public and political debates in time before final decisions are taken.

     The right to be heard mainly limited to consultations on national laws

     The main standardised way for citizens to provide input to draft legislative proposals is through
     website consultations. However, not all draft laws have so far been subject to consultation. Cit-
     izens have to be acquainted with the Ministry's websites to be alerted to consultations, and the
     relevant documents are quite technical. Since these consultations come at a stage when legislative
     text is already quite advanced, it is difficult for citizens to question more fundamentally the pur-
     pose and need for particular financial legislation.

     Because no internet consultations are issued by the Dutch Ministry for citizens wishing to com-
     ment on draft EU legislation, citizens and civil society organisations have little formal ways to influ-
     ence directly the Dutch Ministry’s position on these important decisions.

     There are some other channels of access to the Ministry but there are no guarantees that citizens’
     opinions will be heard and taken into account.

     Transparency about lobbying is scarce

     Information by the Ministry of Finance about its external contacts is scarce. Social media provides
     more openness about the Minister’s meetings and encounters but gives no details of either the
     issues discussed, the Ministry staff involved or the form of contact. The publication of responses
     to public consultations and the disclosure in the Memorie van toelichting about input received, do
     not provide a full insight on contacts, influences and lobbying at the Ministry. Consequently, it is
     impossible for citizens, civil society and also parliamentarians to know the extent of lobbying by
     banks or influence from external bodies, and therefore challenge positions that might damage the
     public interest.




20   A STRUCTURAL PROBLEM IN THE SHADOWS
Is the public interest taken into account?

Up till end of August 2016, the guidelines on integrity of civil servants were not specific about how
to deal with lobbyists and how to protect the public interest. The explanations in the Memorie van
toelichting that clarify how the external inputs have been taken into account are limited and not
sufficient to expose whether informal contacts and influences have been taken into account.

Importantly, information about the weighing of interests and the accountability regarding upcom-
ing EU financial legislation is inadequate. Because transparency is lacking before final decisions are
taken, it is difficult for Dutch citizens and civil society to be able to raise their voice when public
interests are being ignored.



Notes
1   See for more details: Transparency International -               zeven vragen. Dit is ook opgenomen in de Interdeparte-
    Nederland, Lifting the lid on lobbying – Enhancing the           mentale schrijfwijzer memorie van toelichting’.
    trust in public decision-making in the Netherlands,          8   Kenniscentrum Wetgeving en Juridische zaken,
    2015, p. 48.                                                     Draaiboek voor regelgeving - Nr. 9a (Internetconsul-
2   Minister of the Interior and Kingdom Relations, The con-         tatie), (date unknown) https://www.kcwj.nl/kennisbank/
    stitution of the Kingdom of the Netherlands 2008, Arti-          draaiboek-voor-de-regelgeving/hoofdstuk-2-formele-
    cle 110, www.government.nl/documents-and-publi-                  wetten-op-voorstel-van-de-regering-n-19 (last viewed
    cations/regulations/2012/10/18/the-constitution-of-              17 September 2016): ‘In welke gevallen vindt internet-
    the-kingdom-of-the-netherlands-2008.html (viewed 29              consultatie plaats?’.
    March 2015).                                                 9   The paragraph is titled in Dutch ‘Consultatie’ or ‘Consul-
3   Wet openbaarheid van bestuur (Geldend van 01-                    tatie en advies’.
    10-2016 t/m heden), 1991, http://wetten.overheid.            10 Ministry of Finance, Antwoorden schriftelijke vra-
    nl/BWBR0005252/2016-10-01 (last viewed 10 Octo-                  gen coco’s, 16 November 2015, p. 18, https://www.
    ber 2016).                                                       rijksoverheid.nl/binaries/rijksoverheid/documenten/
4   For more information and comments, see: Transpa-                 kamerstukken/2015/11/16/antwoorden-schriftelij-
    rency International - Nederland. Lifting the lid on lob-         ke-vragen-coco%E2%80%99s/antwoorden-schriftelij-
    bying – Enhancing the trust in public decision-making in         ke-vragen-coco%E2%80%99s.pdf (last viewed
    the Netherlands, 2015, p. 48-49: Certain limitations             17 September 2016): ‘In de toelichting bij de regelgeving
    can apply, for example when information gives a perso-           wordt vervolgens vermeld wat de reacties op hoofdlijnen
    nal opinion on a policy (Persoonlijke beleidsopvattingen).       waren en wat hiermee is gedaan in het voorstel. Dit gebeurt
5   For a full overview, see: https://www.kcwj.nl/ (viewed 7         vrijwel altijd in een aparte paragraaf van de toelichting die
    September 2016).                                                 daarmee kan worden beschouwd als een “lobbyparagraaf”.’;
6   Aanwijzingen voor de regelgeving (Geldend van 11-                Kenniscentrum Wetgeving en Juridische zaken, Draai-
    05-2011 t/m heden), 18 November 1992, http://wetten.             boek voor regelgeving - Nr. 9a (Internetconsultatie).
    overheid.nl/BWBR0005730/2011-05-11 (last viewed 6            11 Actieplan open overheid 2016/2017: attached to the
    September 2016).                                                 letter to Parliament by the Minister of Interior and
7   Kenniscentrum Wetgeving en Juridische zaken, Integraal           Kingdom Relations, Toepassing van de Wet openbaar-
    Afwegingskader beleid en regelgeving, www.kcwj.nl/               heid van bestuur, Kamerstuk 32 802, nr. 21, 15
    kennisbank/integraal-afwegingskader-beleid-en-regel              December 2015, https://zoek.officielebekendmakingen.
    geving; also to be found through www.naarhetiak.nl               nl/kst-32802-21.html (last viewed 17 September 2016);
    (last viewed 17 September 2016); Tweede Kamer,                   Ministry of Finance, Response to questions for SOMO
    Verslag van een schriftelijk overleg, Kamerstuk 32 637,          research regarding transparency and weighing of inte-
    Nr. 243, 21 June 2016. ‘Integraal afwegingskader                 rests related to financial legislative processes and lob-
    voor beleid en regelgeving (IAK) is een openbaar                 bying by banks, email received by SOMO on 19 July
    afwegingskader. Het is voor een ieder toegankelijk               2016: Response to question nr. 2.
    via www.naarhetiak.nl en www.kcwj.nl. Ook de uitkom-         12 Rijksoverheid, Gedragscode Integriteit Rijk, 24 Septem-
    sten van de afweging die in een concreet dossier                 ber 2015, https://www.rijksoverheid.nl/binaries/rijks-
    plaatsvindt op grond van het IAK zijn openbaar: bij              overheid/documenten/rapporten/2015/09/24/gedrags-
    internetconsultatie wordt een apart document gepubli-            code-integriteit-rijk/gedragscode-integriteit-rijk.pdf
    ceerd waarin de zeven vragen van het IAK worden                  (viewed 13 September 2016).
    beantwoord, en in de memorie van toelichting dient           13 Tweede Kamer, Initiatiefnota van de leden Bouwmeester
    zichtbaar antwoord te worden gegeven op diezelfde                en Oosenbrug: “Lobby in dagicht: luisteren en laten zien”,



                                                                                                                                21
         Kamerstuk 34 376, blg-650569, 24 December 2015.                     lobbying by banks, email received by SOMO on 19 July
     14 Ministry of Economic Affairs, Brief van de Minister van              2016: https://wetgevingskalender.overheid.nl/.
         Economische Zaken aan de Voorzitter van de Tweede               23 As tested, for example, for this report on 5 September
         Kamer der Staten-Generaal, Brief nr. 238, Kamerstuk 32              2016: of the two consultations that were still open for
         637, 11 April 2016.                                                 responses, namely the ‘Wijzigingswet financiële markten
     15 Tweede Kamer, Parlementair onderzoek financieel stelsel              2018’ (consultation open until 8 September 2016: ht-
         - Rapport, 10 May 2010, https://zoek.officielebekendma-             tps://www.internetconsultatie.nl/wijzigingswetfm2018)
         kingen.nl/kst-31980-4.html: Recommendation nr. 18:                  and ‘Wijzigingswet financiële markten 2017’ (consultation
         ‘De commissie beveelt de Kamer aan om de mogelijkheden              open until 8 September 2016: https://www.internet-
         te onderzoeken om de invloed van belanghebbenden op de              consultatie.nl/wijzigingsbesluitfm2017), only the former
         inhoud en totstandkoming van wet- en regelgeving transpa-           was mentioned on the overview of upcoming legislation
         ranter te maken. In dat verband zou een systeem van                 (https://wetgevingskalender.overheid.nl/) with search
         «legislative footprint», een systeem waarbij de wetgever            terms in Dutch: Ministry of Finance, law and ‘financiën
         aangeeft welke actoren op welke wijze betrokken zijn                / financieel toezicht’ (term European affairs did not
         geweest bij de opstelling van regulering, kunnen worden             succeed in providing a result).
         onderzocht’.                                                    24 For a good explanation in Dutch and overview of the
     16 Ministry of Finance, Gedragslijn Externe contacten, 29               contents/format of the BNC-fiche, see: https://www.
         August 2016, https://www.rijksoverheid.nl/documenten/               europa-nu.nl/id/vh8es07d69yp/bnc_fiche?ksel=n3
         richtlijnen/2016/08/29/gedragslijn-externe-contac                   (viewed 5 September 2016).
         ten-ministerie-van-financien (last viewed 7 October             25 See for instance the letter on 7 April 2016 by the Minis-
         2016).                                                              ter to the parliament about the change of a major
     17 See for example: Tweede Kamer, Vragen van de leden                   national bank law, (Kamerstuk 34 208, nr.13, https://
         Nijboer en Bouwmeester (beiden PvdA) aan de Ministers               zoek.officielebekendmakingen.nl/dossier/34208/
         van Financiën en van Binnenlandse Zaken en Konink-                  kst-34208-13?resultIndex=0&sorttype=1&sortorder=4
         rijksrelaties over de transparantie van de lobbypraktijken          (viewed 2 September 2016).
         van Nederlandse banken (ingezonden december 2013),              26 See for instance: Ministry of Finance, Antwoorden
         Vergaderjaar 2013-2014, Aanhangselnummer 1142, 7                    schriftelijke vragen coco’s, 16 November 2015, p. 18.
         February 2014 (viewed 10 February 2014): Responding             27 https://www.rijksoverheid.nl/ministeries/ministe-
         In February 2014 to SOMO’s report ‘Taking lobbying                  rie-van-financien or https://www.rijksoverheid.nl/
         public’, Minister Dijsselbloem agreed that transparency             ministeries/ministerie-van-financien/nieuws : see ‘Blijf op
         about how different interests are weighed in decisi-                de hoogte’ (viewed 5 September 2016).
         on making is important. He referred to the specific             28 For instance, the twitter accounts of the spokesper-
         paragraph in the Memorie van toelichting which details              sons of the Ministry are not mentioned on the Ministry’s
         public responses to the internet consultation and how               website, see https://www.rijksoverheid.nl/ministeries/
         these are considered by the Ministry. This was a ‘lobby             ministerie-van-financien/inhoud/contact/woordvoer-
         footprint' according to the Minister.                               ders-ministerie-van-financien (last viewed 7 October
     18 See for instance: Ministry of Finance, Antwoorden                    2016).
         schriftelijke vragen coco’s, 16 November 2015, p. 1:            29 Ministry of Finance, Response to questions for SOMO
         ‘De inbreng van externe partijen is van groot belang bij de         research regarding transparency and weighing of
         opstelling van wet- en regelgeving. Dit draagt bij aan de           interests related to financial legislative processes and
         vormgeving en uitvoerbaarheid van de wetgeving’. Idem, p.           lobbying by banks, email received by SOMO on 19 July
         15.                                                                 2016: Response to question nr. 6: According to the Mi-
     19 Ministry of Finance, Idem, p. 1: ‘Hoewel het cabinet veel            nistry, all formal written speeches should be online, but
         waarde hecht aan die inbreng, maakt het cabinet een eigen-          research for this report found that not all full speeches
         standige afweging waarmee het algemene belang het beste             are on the website of the Ministry/government.
         is gediend. Het kabinet is derhalve als politiek verantwoor-    30 Ministry of Finance, Antwoorden schriftelijke vragen
         delijek steeds penvoerder, zelfs als concrete tekstsuggesties       coco’s, 16 November 2015, p. 11: The ministry en-
         worden overgnomen.’                                                 deavours to inform the parliament timely and fully as
     20 https://www.rijksoverheid.nl/ministeries/ministe-                    possible.
         rie-van-financien/onderwerpen (viewed 5 September               31 https://www.rijksoverheid.nl/documenten?tref-
         2016).                                                              woord=Wob-verzoek&periode-van=&periode-tot=&on-
     21 https://www.rijksoverheid.nl/onderwerpen/hervor-                     derdeel=Ministerie+van+Financi%C3%ABn&type=Al-
         ming-financiele-sector (viewed 5 September 2016).                   le+documenten (search on 6 September 2016 and previ-
     22 Ministry of Finance, Response to questions for SOMO                  ous dates).
         research regarding transparency and weighing of inte-           32 See particular consultations at www.internetconsultatie.
         rests related to financial legislative processes and                nl using the search term ‘Ministry of Finance’.




22   A STRUCTURAL PROBLEM IN THE SHADOWS
33 Ministry of Finance, Gedragslijn Externe contacten, 29       43 Ministry of Finance, Antwoorden vragen Eerste Kamer
    August 2016.                                                    aanpassing richtlijn Solvabiliteit II en securisatie
34 Ministry of Finance, Response to questions for SOMO              voorstellen, 17 December 2015, p. 7, note 3, https://
    research regarding transparency and weighing of                 www.google.nl/url?sa=t&rct=j&q=&esrc=s&source=we-
    interests related to financial legislative processes and        b&cd=1&ved=0ahUKEwjf-vCUmfjPAhWBvRoKH-
    lobbying by banks, email received by SOMO on 19 July            fa4DZMQFggcMAA&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.
    2016: Response to question nr. 6: These give an over-           rijksoverheid.nl%2Fbinaries%2Frijksoverheid%2Fdocu-
    view of the appointments made by the Minister outside           menten%2Fkamerstukken%2F2015%2F12%2F17%-
    the Ministry. The diary is announced weekly but any last        2Fantwoorden-vragen-eerste-kamer-aanpas-
    minute changes are not incorporated onto the website.           sing-richtlijn-solvabiliteit-ii-en-securisatievoorstel-
    The appointments include a short explanation with a link        len%2Fantwoorden-vragen-eerste-kamer-aanpas-
    to further information if available. The dairy of the Mi-       sing-richtlijn-solvabiliteit-ii-en-securisatievoorstellen.
    nister of Finance can be found at: https://www.rijksover-       pdf&usg=AFQjCNFb0_gQfmOg1IUJ0M2bvdgQtUS-
    heid.nl/regering/inhoud/bewindspersonen/jeroen-dijs-            KlQ&bvm=bv.136593572,d.d2s&cad=rja (last viewed
    selbloem/agenda-test and https://www.rijksoverheid.nl/          7 October 2016): The Ministry provided Parliament (in
    regering/inhoud/bewindspersonen/jeroen-dijsselbloem/            response to a question) with a list of academic literature
    agenda-test/archief-agenda-2016.                                to support its positive assessment of STS securitisation.
35 See for instance the documents released through                  It is not clear from the answer, however, how this list
    the following Wob requests: Regarding the EU legisla-           was used or weighed in the Ministry’s decision.
    tion MiFID II https://www.rijksoverheid.nl/ministeries/     44 Ministry of Foreign Affairs, [BNC-]Fiche 1: Verordeningen
    ministerie-van-financien/documenten/wob-verzoe-                 tot invoering van een Europees kader voor eenvoudige,
    ken/2013/09/19/besluit-wob-verzoek-over-de-tot-                 transparante en gestandaardiseerde securitisaties, 6
    standkoming-van-mifidii-richtlijn-markten-voor-finan-           November 2015, paragr. 5, c: https://www.google.nl/
    ciele-instrumenten (last viewed 17 September 2016),             url?sa=t&rct=j&q=&esrc=s&source=web&cd=1&ve-
    and regarding tax deductibility of CoCo’s (see below box        d=0ahUKEwiy7O7In_jPAhUCExoKHdG_A-AQFgg-
    4) https://www.rijksoverheid.nl/documenten/wob-ver-             cMAA&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.rijksoverheid.
    zoeken/2015/10/07/besluit-wob-verzoek-inzake-be-                nl%2Fbinaries%2Frijksoverheid%2Fdocumenten%2F-
    leid-coco-s (last viewed 17 September 2016).                    kamerstukken%2F2015%2F11%2F06%2Fbijla-
36 Ministry of Finance, Antwoorden schriftelijke vragen             gen-bij-kamerbrief-informatievoorziening-over-nieu-
    coco’s, 16 November 2015.                                       we-commissievoorstellen%2F628730die-bijlage-2.
37 European Commission, Consultation document - An EU               pdf&usg=AFQjCNHGDEwIWBG8uRfQsTjVWZ15xg-
    framework for simple, transparent and standardised se-          GXFg&bvm=bv.136593572,d.d2s&cad=rja (last viewed
    curitisation,18 February 2015, http://ec.europa.eu/finan-       7 October 2016): ‘De voorstellen leidt niet tot financiële
    ce/consultations/2015/securitisation/docs/consultati-           kosten voor burgers.’
    on-document_en.pdf (last viewed 9 September 2016).          45 Ministry of Finance, Antwoorden op de vragen van de
38 See for a short mentioning: http://data.consilium.europa.        vaste commissie voor Financiën van 26 november jl.
    eu/doc/document/ST-14922-2015-INIT/en/pdf (viewed               over de Verordeningen tot invoering van een Europees
    6 September 2016) and http://data.consilium.europa.             kader voor eenvoudige, transparante en gestandaardi-
    eu/doc/document/st-14701-2015-rev-1/en/pdf (last                seerde securitisaties, 1 December 2015, p. 5 (note 3), 8,
    viewed 7 October 2016).                                         https://www.rijksoverheid.nl/documenten/kamerstuk-
39 To monitor the European Parliament decision-making               ken/2015/12/01/antwoorden-op-kamervragen-over-se-
    on the legislative proposal for STS securitisation, see:        curitisatievoorstellen (viewed 15 April 2016) : In
    http://www.europarl.europa.eu/oeil/popups/ficheproce-           response to questions from MPs on how much financing
    dure.do?reference=2015/0226(COD)&l=en#tab-0.                    for SMEs will take place through STS securitisation, the
40 Ministry of Finance, Nieuwe Commissievoorstellen en              Minister acknowledged that it was impossible to predict
    initiatieven van de lidstaten van de Europese Unie, Ka-         but that the EC had estimated EUR100-150 bn, and
    merstuk 22 112, Brief Nr 1950, 17 March 2015.                   that current securitisation was mainly for mortgages.
41 This can be found on the website: https://www.rijks-         46 Ministry of Finance, Kabinetsreactie groenboek kapi-
    overheid.nl/ministeries/ministerie-van-financien/inhoud/        taalmarktunie en consultatiedocumenten over securiti-
    contact .                                                       saties en herziening van prospectusrichtlijn, 17 March
42 Experience by the author (asking for information and a           2015, p. 7, https://www.rijksoverheid.nl/documenten/
    meeting) by writing letters, contacts through the stan-         kamerstukken/2015/03/17/kabinetsreactie-groen-
    dardised web contact point and via the spokespersons            boek-kapitaalmarktunie-en-consultatiedocumen-
    has been difficult or has taken a very long time before a       ten-over-securitisaties-en-herziening-van-prospectus-
    response was given.                                             richtlijn (viewed 15 April 2016).




                                                                                                                                 23
24   A STRUCTURAL PROBLEM IN THE SHADOWS
Chapter 2

THE INVISIBLE THREADS LINK-
ING BANKS AND THE MINISTRY
OF FINANCE




                              25
                Introduction
a more com-     Chapter one examined the difficulties encountered by citizens wishing to give input to the Ministry
prehensive      of Finance on legislative proposals, because of a lack of accessible public information and hard-to-
picture         find methods of consultation. It also revealed that there was little information published about the
                lobbying activities of Dutch banks towards the Ministry of Finance or other interactions with the
                Ministry which could influence upcoming financial legislation. A more comprehensive picture of
                contacts, influences and lobbying at the Ministry of Finance could only be established through re-
                search for this report (see also introduction and Annexes on SOMO’s website).1

formal or       This chapter provides an insight into the relationship between the Ministry of Finance and six
informal        Dutch banks (ABN AMRO, ASN Bank (independent but 100% owned by SNS Bank), ING, Rabobank,
contact and     SNS Bank and Triodos Bank). It focuses on interaction that takes place between them throughout
lobbying        the domestic and EU legislative process and exposes the influence exerted by the banking sector
                through formal or informal contact and lobbying. Information about the different kind of contacts
                between the banks and the Ministry is mostly not publically available. Consequently, it is not open
                to scrutiny from the public or even parliament, which makes it vulnerable for regulatory capture.
                For information on how lobbying is organised within banks and the industry associations which lob-
                by on behalf of banks, see chapters three and four, respectively.




                The formal and informal consultation processes
                Internet consultation – The limits

the main       The Ministry of Finance uses the public internet consultation as the main formal instrument for
formal instru- receiving feedback on forthcoming legislation from relevant stakeholders, including citizens (see
ment           chapter one).2 At the same time, it is a way of publicly disseminating information about potential
               new financial laws. The Dutch Banking Association/Nederlandse Vereniging van Banken (DBA/
               NVB) considers the internet consultation as one of its preferred channels to comment on draft
               national financial regulation on behalf of its member banks3 though it also uses other means.4
               (For more information on the relationship between Dutch banks and the DBA/NVB see box 3 and
               chapter 3.) While the banks prefer the DBA/NVB to respond to consultations on their behalf, large
               banks such as ABN AMRO, ING and Rabobank might also respond individually in order to reflect
               the concerns of the worldwide operations of their banking group.5 SNS Bank responds only via
               DBA/NVB6, and its subsidiary ASN Bank does not take part in the lobbying activities of the DBA/
               NVB related to financial legislation but only participates in the sustainable platform of the DBA/
               NVB.7 All formal responses from banks and the DBA/NVB to consultations are published on the
               Ministry of Finance’s website, and the banks and the DBA/NVB insist that is the case, while only
               the DBA/NVB also publishes its positions on its own website.8

prior to the    Research for this report has found, as explained below, that significant contact between banks and
internet con-   the Ministry has usually already taken place at the beginning of the legislative process, and prior to
sultation       the internet consultation, often at the request of the Ministry. Because of the limited time available
                to respond to consultations, the DBA/NVB prefers to be informed of topics being covered in legis-
                lative proposals before the consultation is opened to the public.9

                The Memorie van toelichting (the explanatory document attached to legislative proposals sent to
                parliament) does not include much, if any, information on informal contacts and lobbying by ex-
                ternal industry sources and other stakeholders outside of the public internet consultation process,
                although it should detail how the Ministry has responded to input received.




26              A STRUCTURAL PROBLEM IN THE SHADOWS
box 3               THE ROLE OF THE DBA/NVB IN RELATION TO THE MINISTRY OF FINANCE

                    There are many conversations and contacts between DBA/NVB staff (and member representatives),
                    and civil servants about domestic, EU and international financial regulatory issues under consider-
                    ation by the Ministry of Finance. This happens as many times at the request of the Ministry as it
                    does at the request of the sector.10
                    The banks prefer to organise much of their lobby activity, and the information sharing that takes
                    place prior to lobbying, through the DBA/NVB. By working together the banks have a stronger
                    voice and their positions are considered more legitimate by the Ministry of Finance. 11

                    The DBA/NVB develops its positions towards upcoming financial legislative and regulatory pro-
                    cesses in specific committees and working groups 12 that include experts, lobbyists and higher man-
                    agement from member banks. In a hierarchical process, the bank representatives discuss and de-
                    velop compromise positions on which to lobby. Topics of significant importance are discussed and
                    decided on at DBA/NVB board level following discussions in a committee and/or working group. 13
                    The board of the DBA/NVB includes the chairs and members of the management boards of ABN
                    AMRO, ING and Rabobank (two members each) and SNS Bank and Triodos Bank (one member
                    each; Triodos Bank representing the smaller banks).14

                    The DBA/NVB also responds to demands for contacts and expert advice from the Ministry of Fi-
                    nance and other governmental bodies. The Ministry often contacts the DBA/NVB as an efficient
                    way to ensure a good representation of the banking sector in the Netherlands. It is the vision of
                    the DBA/NVB that serving the interests of banks usually consists in providing factual and well-in-
                    formed information to the Ministry.15

                    (For more information, see also chapter 3)




                 Out of the public eye – The multiple communication channels

range of con- Numerous formal and informal contacts take place in different forms between the Ministry of Fi-
tacts         nance and banks on upcoming national and EU legislation. These contacts range from exchanging
              information, to lobbying on specific issues, and take place between all levels of personnel – from
              experts and civil servants, to (incidentally) CEOs and the Minister. It can be initiated by either
              banks or the Ministry, take a variety of forms and be ad hoc or through more standard meetings.

little public    Information about these various interactions and the detailed subjects that are being discussed is
information      not publically available, yet they are typical for lobbying to be effective and regulatory capture to
                 occur. On the other hand, openness by the Ministry to expertise and knowledge sharing promotes
                 an understanding of the functioning and challenges stakeholders face. However, without adequate
                 transparency and accountability about what is being discussed, it remains difficult to know if and
                 how the interests of the banks have been taken into account regarding legislation and whether in-
                 terests of other stakeholders have been ignored or side-lined.

different for-   Research for this report found that the following kind of meetings and interaction might take place
mats             between the Ministry and the Dutch banks:
                 • ‘Technical’ conversations and meetings between civil servants and industry associations
                   such as the DBA/NVB, banking experts or bank representatives about the impact of up
                   coming legislation on banks;16
                 • Quarterly meetings (known as kennis sessies) between civil servants and bank experts in which
                   information and expertise are exchanged;17




                                                                                                                          27
               • Technical working groups made up of bank experts which provide civil servants with information
                 and opinion. Technical working groups are often formed because a civil servant needs particular
                 information or wants to hear the opinions of the banks as part of a broader survey among differ-
                 ent stakeholders;18
               • Briefings to share technical information;19
               • Letters, emails and other forms of correspondence.

               Bilateral contacts initiated by the Ministry itself occur regularly. Civil servants may require specific
               factual information from a bank to enable, for example, the Minister to respond to a parliamentary
               question. In these instances, the bank’s lobby unit may put the civil servant in touch with the bank-
               ing staff member with appropriate expertise. Most contact regarding financial legislation/reforms
               is between civil servants from the Financial Markets Department and bank representatives, who at
               times communicate on a first-name basis. Civil servants may also visit the bank to discuss impor-
               tant issues.20 Legal experts in the Ministry are often familiar with their banking counterparts and
               may (sometimes) liaise directly on upcoming legislation.21

               Bilateral contact initiated by the banks includes meetings with the Ministry to find out about up-
               coming policies and legislation, and to give the bank’s expertise, perspective, difficulties, wishes
               and objections to such policies and legislation. ING, for example, has a lobby unit called ‘Regulatory
               and International Affairs Department’ and aims, according to its website, to ‘influence regulatory
               developments for an outcome compatible with the interests of ING’s business, its stakeholders and
               the banking industry as a whole’. Bilateral contacts – whether through emails, informal and formal
               meetings, or telephone calls - can be frequent and intensive, especially when future legislation is
               being discussed. Lobbying positions can include suggested changes and amendments to proposed
               regulations, presentations of calculated negative impacts and position papers.22

undue          Given these close and frequent contacts behind closed doors, it is perhaps unsurprising that there
lobbying un-   are examples of undue or excessive lobbying. In the case of ‘CoCo gate’ (see box), the Minister was
surprising     willing to rule in favour of the competitiveness of the banks, for example, at the expense of the
               treasury, i.e. the public interest of the tax payers. This was exposed by the media as regulatory cap-
               ture.



box 4             ‘COCO-GATE’ (IN BRIEF)

                  Legal proposals by the Ministry of Finance sent to the Dutch Parliament in 2014 covered, amongst
                  other things, the non-taxation of contingent convertible bonds (CoCos). CoCos are a financial in-
                  strument to boost banks’ capital buffers. They are mostly bonds issued by banks and sold to inves-
                  tors. In times of crisis, these bonds become shares and the bank is exempted from repaying inves-
                  tors. The Minister of Finance proposed that Dutch banks pay no tax on CoCos, arguing that such
                  taxation would disadvantage Dutch banks since CoCos issued by banks in other EU countries were
                  seen as not being taxed.

                  Investigations conducted by the newspaper NRC Handelsblad23 revealed that, while developing
                  these proposals, the Minister of Finance ignored warnings by the Ministry’s civil servants that such
                  exemptions would be regarded by the EU as state aid. This risk was also not apparent in the legis-
                  lative proposal presented to parliament. In addition it was revealed that suggested amendments to
                  the text of the legislation were made by representatives of the financial sector and were directly
                  copied into the proposals sent to parliament before other external parties and stakeholders had
                  considered them.

                  Many informal contacts were shown to have taken place between the banks and Ministry of Fi-
                  nance before the legislative proposal was sent to parliament, in addition to formal meetings that
                  took place between bank CEOs and the Minister of Finance. Documents released following an
                  access to documents (Wob) request show that specific arguments made through lobbying and the




28             A STRUCTURAL PROBLEM IN THE SHADOWS
                    need for urgency24 were communicated to the Ministry in emails, letters, telephone conversations
                    and meetings.25 A draft of the legislative proposal was also sent to the DBA/NVB for consultation. 26

                    Note that the aim of CoCos is to increase the bank’s capital buffers and provide a new way of
                    dealing with financial crises. By not paying taxes, the bank should be able to build up more capital
                    –which is not always easy to do. However, rather than keeping such profits to build up its capi-
                    tal buffers, ING for example, paid out a dividend of € 471 million to its shareholders for the year
                    2014.27 By contrast, it is estimated that, as a result of this legislation, the treasury/tax payer lost
                    €350 million.28

                    When this behaviour was exposed by the Dutch media, it was considered a scandal. Many saw it as
                    evidence of the influence exerted by the large Dutch banks and the DBA/NVB on the Ministry of
                    Finance to make the fiscal deductibility of CoCos legally clear as soon as possible because investors
                    were at that time enthusiastic to buy CoCos.

                    In subsequent parliamentary discussions, the Minister claimed sole responsibility for the tax deduc-
                    tion proposal and its wording.29




                 Lobbying at the top level: contacting the Minister of Finance

final responsi- The Minister of Finance’s responsibility for both weighing of diverse stakeholders’ interests and
bility          making the final decision on legislative proposals, makes him a key target for lobbyists.

top level lob-   The Minister meets those at the highest level of the banks, i.e. the chairs and other members of
bying            the managing boards. These meetings are prepared by top civil servants in the Ministry of Finance
                 and senior members of staff at the bank, such as the head of the lobby unit.30 There are established
                 appointments as well as ad hoc meetings, which might be as follows according to research for this
                 report31:
                 • Regular meetings (regulier overleg)32 of the Ministry with the CEOs/chairs of the managing boards
                   of the largest Dutch banks, on average 4 times a year.
                 • Meetings on average once a year between the Minister and DBA/NVB board members33, i.e. the
                   chair and/or other members of the banks’ management boards.
                 • Occasional individual bilateral meetings or contacts between some CEOs and board members of
                   large Dutch banks on particular issues.34

                 In addition, there are occasionally informal contact between the Minister and the top ranking rep-
                 resentatives of the banks or DBA/NVB through phone calls35 or even text messages.36

events           The Minister regularly speaks at, or attends, conferences and events organised by financial industry
                 associations of which some Dutch banks are a member.37 At such events, different informal con-
                 tacts take place and positions are exchanged.

substantial      From documents released by access to information requests, information drawn from the Minister’s
but imbal-       diary, and the above overview of meetings exposed through research for this report, it is clear that
anced inter-     there is substantial interaction at the highest level between the banking sector and the Minister
action           related to financial legislation and policy. These high level contacts appear to create an imbalanced
                 influence on a key decision-maker, the Minister, as there is no such level or amount of similar con-
                 tact with individuals or organisations representing the public interest. The Minister’s diary includes
                 very few encounters with non-financial actors and if he does, engagement with students seems to
                 be preferred.




                                                                                                                              29
                 The different interests at stake
                 The Ministry’s choice for contacts38

criteria         Civil servants at the Ministry who prepare legislative proposals arrange external contacts to share
                 expertise about particular issues. The criteria they use39 to invite and interact with such external
                 contacts - experts, representatives and lobbyists from banks, etc. - include expertise required to
                 discuss such legislation, the interests at stake in the proposals, and diversity of stakeholders affect-
                 ed. These invitation criteria are important if balanced interaction and influence at the Ministry is to
                 be ensured.

banks’ ex-       In practice, it seems that more consideration is given to inviting the financial sector. The DBA/NVB
perts            is easily contacted to bring together various bank representatives. The staff in the lobby units of
                 the large banks is well known to the Ministry along with the banks’ experts and can also be easily
                 contacted should particular information be required. The Ministry argues that input from banks40
                 provides useful information and feedback on the possible practical impact of proposed legislation.
                 The Ministry also formally consults with financial authorities such as the Dutch Central Bank and
                 the financial market authority (AFM)41, as well as getting advise from the Raad van State.

DBA/NVB          The Ministry prefers to deal with banks via the DBA/NVB. It assumes the position taken by the
input            DBA/NVB on upcoming legislation, as for example expressed in official internet consultations, is
                 the position of its members42. The position of the DBA/NVB is frequently a compromise, based on
                 discussions by working groups and committees and, for important issues, decisions made by DBA/
                 NVB board members.43 The banks do not consider the positions of industry associations to be fully
                 identical with their own positions.44 The CEO of Triodos Bank also participates in board decisions
                 as a representative of the small banks, not as Triodos Bank.45

                 How does the Ministry weigh differing interests?

little insight   The presentation of a legislative proposal for a public internet consultation should include a doc-
                 ument on how government guidelines on integrity and weighing of interests (IAK guidelines) have
                 been applied, but it is usually only accompanied by the Memorie van toelichting. This explanatory
                 note does not include details of input already submitted, discussions and meetings held, and con-
                 tacts made prior to the time of the internet consultation.46 Only when the final national legislative
                 proposal is sent to parliament does the Ministry explain how inputs – mainly the internet respons-
                 es - have been taken into account while giving little insight about how it has integrated the other
                 interactions and influences received.

no analytical    So far, there has been little reaction to internet consultations outside the financial sector.47 Re-
overview         sponses to the consultation can be published on the website, although responses can remain anon-
                 ymous or unpublished if so requested. There is no analytical overview of the types of stakeholders
                 who have responded though the Ministry declares that it will take account of the range of stake-
                 holders who have provided input.48

                 Following consultations, meetings and discussions – and after weighing the stakeholders’ interests,
                 the general public interest, the interests of the Dutch economy and financial sector - the Ministry
                 makes a decision paying particular attention to the applicability of the law and political accepta-
                 bility.49

the Ministry’s   The DBA/NVB and the large Dutch banks – ABN AMRO, ING and Rabobank – consider that50 the
knowledge-       Ministry of Finance makes independent decisions on proposed financial legislation based on a
able under-      knowledgeable understanding of the relevant issues. They believe that it is no more receptive to
standing         positions put forward by the banks than it is to those offered by other stakeholders. In fact, they
                 do not always see their positions recognised and find the Ministry less protective of its domestic
                 banking industry than other EU countries such as Germany or France where the links between the
                 financial sector and policy makers is even stronger.


30               A STRUCTURAL PROBLEM IN THE SHADOWS
imbalance in   The overall outcome seems to be that the Ministry makes attempts to take independent decisions
practice       on banking legislative proposals but in practice it receives major input from the banking sector and
               little from citizens, civil society or public interest groups. In these conditions, balancing the diverse
               interests of the banking sector and how it operates, and prioritising public interests becomes diffi-
               cult if not questionable.



box 5             THE CASE STUDY OF STS SECURITISATION: HOW DID THE MINISTRY PREPARE ITS
                  POSITION?

                  Chapter one (1) explained that citizens had little knowledge or ability to comment on the 2015
                  European Commission legislative proposal on simple, transparent and standardised (STS) securitisa-
                  tion as part of the creation of a Capital Markets Union (CMU). The Ministry of Finance responded
                  in May 2015 to the consultation issued by the EC prior to its publication of the final EU legislative
                  proposal. Only once it had responded was the Ministry’s position on STS securitisation transparent.

                  In order to prepare its position - according to papers available to the public - the Ministry mainly
                  consulted documents from financial authorities (as explained in chapter 1). Although these doc-
                  uments are subject to influence from lobbying, the Ministry stated to SOMO that it trusted that
                  there were proper rules and processes in place at these institutions for controlling lobbying input. 51
                  The Minister also referred to academic papers but it is not clear how they informed his decision.

                  Before the consultation, however, the Ministry had also consulted representatives of banks, in-
                  surance companies, pension funds and 'other relevant parties' according to information from the
                  Ministry to SOMO.52 Research for this report also revealed that the Dutch Securitisation Associa-
                  tion (DSA) – a Dutch industry association of which ABN AMRO, ING, Rabobank and SNS Bank are
                  member – developed a position on STS securitisation and responded to the EC consultation. 53 It is
                  not clear which banks, insurance companies, pension funds or 'other relevant parties' the Ministry
                  met, nor whether it met the DSA, and whether they influenced the Ministry’s position.

                  Note that the Netherlands has one of the highest volume of securitisation of residential mortgages
                  in the EU.54

                  Neither the banks nor the DBA/NVB claim to have been consulted about the Ministry’s response
                  to the EC consultation on STS securitisation and had not seen it until it was sent to the EC consul-
                  tation website. The DBA/NVB finds that the Ministry of Finance makes its own choices on who to
                  contact and when.55

                  (1) For more background information, see chapter 1.




               Comments and conclusions on the multiple consultations
               Lack of transparency on range of interactions

               There is very little information available on the informal and formal contacts the Ministry of Fi-
               nance and the banks have with each other, which include meetings and interactions on a range of
               issues. The Memorie van toelichting that accompanies the final legislative proposal when it is pre-
               sented to parliament, does not include specifics about all these external contacts that have taken
               place during the development of the legislative proposal. These external contacts range from civil
               servants directly contacting experts from banks, to the Minister of Finance meeting the chairs of
               the managing boards of banks. Such contacts can be initiated by the Ministry or the banks.
               While the Minister’s diary, social media accounts and speeches make the Ministry of Finance some-
               what more transparent then other Ministries, the content of the meetings mentioned in the Minis-
               ter’s diary is not clear. There is no public information when and on what (senior) civil servants meet
               with external contacts.

                                                                                                                            31
     Unbalanced and privileged access

     Compared to citizens, banks have privileged and easy access both to the Ministry of Finance and
     the Minister. This access allows the financial sector, for example, to discuss issues regarding up-
     coming legislation prior to an official public consultation, while citizens only see the first proposal
     of a new national law when the Ministry opens an internet consultation. Advanced knowledge of
     domestic and EU legislation that is being developed, enables the banks to better prepare their in-
     put. The many various informal contacts by the banking sector also result in the Ministry being fully
     aware with the operations, interests and positions of the banks while citizens and non-financial
     sector stakeholders have no equivalent way of promoting their positions and interests. Neverthe-
     less, the effectiveness of such contacts, inputs and lobbying by the banks is not clear to the banks
     themselves.

     There is hardly any public opportunity to comment on the position of the Ministry in ECOFIN,
     though it is here that the Minister co-decides on future EU laws. Once decided, EU laws become
     most visible to Dutch citizens when implemented at national level while the large banks might al-
     ready have taken many chances to comment on such legislation beforehand.

     An organised lobby with access to the final political decision-maker

     The DBA/NVB plays an important role in facilitating contacts with, and lobbying towards, the Min-
     istry. This industry association has sufficient means, resources, expertise and political clout through
     its own organisation and its member banks, to influence who the Ministry interacts with. It should
     be noted that the DBA/NVB’s lobbying position is often a compromise between the positions of
     its member banks, some of whom are more involved in preparing the position than others. The top
     managers of the banks, being the board members of the DBA/NVB, have easy access to the Min-
     ister of Finance. The ability and capacity of the large banks to monitor legislative developments
     as well as promote their lobbying interests, allows them to influence – at the right time - civil
     servants at the Ministry as well as the Minister who is the final decision-maker at Dutch level for
     financial legislative proposals. Citizens and non-profit civil society organisations do not have such
     means to monitor, develop analysis and positions, and/or present their viewpoints to the Minister.

     Impact on the weighing of interests by the Ministry and accountability regarding lobbying

     The DBA/NVB and the large banks consider that the Ministry takes informed, independent and
     balanced decisions that reflect the views of different stakeholders. The official consultations, the
     public diary and social media accounts of the Minister, as well as the many formal or informal inter-
     actions with bank representatives revealed for this report, though, show that the majority of con-
     tact is with the financial sector. Upcoming financial legislation is barely discussed with citizens, civil
     society organisations, consumers, etc. ‘CoCo-gate’ exposed by the media as a scandal of regulatory
     capture, showed the risks of the existing network of close contacts and lobbying on legislation, and
     the scale of influence the financial sector can wield in this context at the expense of the tax payer.
     The Memorie van toelichting that accompanies national legislative proposals does not have exten-
     sive explanations as to how the different interests are balanced and how the impact and risks for
     citizens and the public interest is weighed.

     How the Ministry arrives at its position to co-decide on future EU laws is not well substantiated
     and lobbying inputs into that process are not made public, as the case of STS securitisation shows.




32   A STRUCTURAL PROBLEM IN THE SHADOWS
Notes

1   This chapter is mainly based on: 1) interviews with, and     18 Annex Rabobank, paragr. 5.1.
    desk research about, six Dutch banks (ABN AMRO, ING,         19 Annex ABN AMRO, paragr. 5.2.
    Rabobank, Triodos Bank, SNS Bank and its subsidiary          20 Annex Rabobank, paragr. 5.1.
    ASN Bank) https://www.somo.nl/topic/financial-sector/;       21 Annex ABN AMRO, paragr. 5.1.
    2) an interview with the DBA/NVB (Aleid Van Der              22 See the letter from Euroclear commenting on draft
    Zwan, supported by Bart van Leeuwen) by SOMO (My-                legislative amendments discussed at the EU Council of
    riam Vander Stichele supported by Sam van Dijck) on 22           Ministers of Finance (https://www.rijksoverheid.
    June 2016; 3) Ministry of Finance, [written] Response            nl/binaries/rijksoverheid/documenten/wob-ver
    to questions for SOMO research regarding transparency            zoeken/2013/09/19/bijlagen-bij-besluit-wob-ver
    and weighing of interests related to financial legislative       zoek-over-de-totstandkoming-van-mifidii-richtlijn-mark-
    processes and lobbying by banks, email received by               ten-voor-financiele-instrumenten/wob-mails-euro
    SOMO on 19 July 2016.                                            clear-def.pdf) and different other emails of corres-
2   Ministry of Finance, Response to questions for SOMO              pondence (https://www.rijksoverheid.nl/ministeries/
    research regarding transparency and weighing of inte-            ministerie-van-financien/documenten/wob-verzoe-
    rests related to financial legislative processes and lob-        ken/2013/09/19/besluit-wob-verzoek-over-de-tot
    bying by banks, email received by SOMO on 19 July                standkoming-van-mifidii-richtlijn-markten-voor-financie-
    2016: Response to question nr. 9.                                le-instrumenten) (last viewed 17 September2016).
3   See annexes of ABN AMRO, ING, Rabobank and SNS               23 C. Driessen, ‘De bank vraagt, de minister draait -
    Bank; A. van der Zwan, Head Public Affairs, DBA/NVB,             Minister reserveerde met hulp van ING fiscaal voordeel
    interview with SOMO, 22 June 2016.                               voor alleen banken’, NRC Handelsblad, 3 November
4   A. van der Zwan, Head Public Affairs, DBA/NVB, inter-            2015.
    view with SOMO, 22 June 2016.                                24 https://www.rijksoverheid.nl/documenten/publica-
5   Annex ING, paragr. 1.1.                                          ties/2015/10/07/bijlage-4-bij-besluit-wob-verzoek-
6   Annex SNS Bank, paragr. 1.1.                                     in-zake-beleid-coco-s: see Notitie of 16 April 2014; See
7   Annex ASN Bank, paragr. 1.                                       also handwritten note on internal draft legal proposal (6
8   See: https://www.nvb.nl/publicaties-standpunten/100/             June 2014) for fiscal issues in 2014 submitted to the
    publicaties.html                                                 Minister mentioning ‘op aandringen van de banken’.
9   A. van der Zwan, Head Public Affairs, DBA/NVB, inter-        25 See the published files of the access to information
    view with SOMO, 22 June 2016.                                    request (https://www.rijksoverheid.nl/documenten/
10 A. van der Zwan, Head Public Affairs, DBA/NVB, inter-             wob-verzoeken/2015/10/07/besluit-wob-verzoek-
    view with SOMO, 22 June 2016.                                    inzake-beleid-coco-s); See in attachment 3 of the publis-
11 Ministry of Finance, Gedragslijn Externe contacten, 29            hed files, email of 4 June 2014: https://www.rijks-
    August 2016.                                                     overheid.nl/documenten/publicaties/2015/10/07/
12 See for instance: https://www.nvb.nl/vereniging/122/              bijlage-3-bij-besluit-wob-verzoek-inzake-beleid-coco-s.
    bureau.html (viewed 16 August 2016).                         26 Ministry of Finance, Antwoorden schriftelijke vragen
13 A. van der Zwan, Head Public Affairs, DBA/NVB, inter-             coco’s, 16 November 2015, p. 16-17.
    view with SOMO, 22 June 2016.                                27 http://www.ing.com/Newsroom/Nieuws/Persberichten/
14 See: https://www.nvb.nl/vereniging/3877/bestuur.html              ING-noteert-onderliggende-nettowinst-over-2014-van-
    (last viewed 7 October 2016).                                    EUR-3.424-miljoen-dividend-hervat-met-EUR-012-per-
15 A. van der Zwan, Head Public Affairs, DBA/NVB, inter-             gewoon-aandeel.htm (viewed 10 November 2015): In
    view with SOMO, 22 June 2016.                                    other words, the lobby had paid off for ING’s sharehol-
16 Ministry of Finance, Response to questions for SOMO               ders, not for the public interest of the tax payers.
    research regarding transparency and weighing of inte-        28 https://www.rijksoverheid.nl/documenten/publica-
    rests related to financial legislative processes and lob-        ties/2015/10/07/bijlage-4-bij-besluit-wob-verzoek-
    bying by banks, email received by SOMO on 19 July                inzake-beleid-coco-s, p. 90: Notitie, 20 April 2016.
    2016: Response to question nr. 10; See also: Tweede          29 Ministry of Finance, Antwoorden schriftelijke vragen
    Kamer, Verslag van een schriftelijk overleg, document            coco’s, 16 November 2015, p. 17.
    32 637, Nr. 243, Vastgesteld 21 juni 2016: Dutch Mi-         30 Annex ABN AMRO, paragr. 5.1.
    nistries are organising formal and informal/non-public       31 The Ministry of Finance was requested to review the
    expert meetings and round tables to consult stakehol-            draft text of this chapter but did not review due to lack
    ders of policy issues and upcoming legislation. It is not        of capacity (C. Gelinck, Spokesperson, Ministry of
    clear how much that is the case at the Ministry of               Finance, email to M. Vander Stichele, Senior Researcher,
    Finance.                                                         SOMO,12 October 2016).
17 Annex ABN AMRO, paragr. 5.1.                                  32 https://www.rijksoverheid.nl/documenten/publica-



                                                                                                                             33
         ties/2015/10/07/bijlage-4-bij-besluit-wob-verzoek-             ing.com/ING-in-Society/Sustainability/Stakehold
         inzake-beleid-coco-s: See Notitie of 17 April 2014: ‘het       er-engagement/Regulation-and-Supervision.htm (last
         reguliere overleg met de CEO’s van de banken’.                 viewed 29 September): ‘Insofar these [industry and
     33 Ministry of Finance, Antwoorden schriftelijke vragen            business] organisations engage in legislative processes
         coco’s, 16 November 2015, p. 14.                               or in the public and political debate around banking,
     34 ING Annex, 5.1; Ministry of Finance, Antwoorden schrif-         they generally do so on behalf of all their member
         telijke vragen coco’s, 16 November 2015, p.14.                 organisations, but not always based on their full con-
     35 See for instance: C. Driessen, P. de Witt Wijnen,               sent. As a consequence, their views and standpoints
         ‘Rabobank doet toch mee aan compensatie deriva-                do not necessarily reflect the individual positions
         ten’, NRC Handelsblad, 7 juli 2016, https://www.nrc.nl/        taken by ING.’
         nieuws/2016/07/07/rabobank-doet-toch-mee-aan-              45 Annex Triodos Bank.
         compensatie-derivaten-3137204-a1509376 (last vie-          46 See also chapter 1 for more explanations; Tweede
         wed 7 October 2016).                                           Kamer, Verslag van een schriftelijk overleg, document
     36 P. de Witt Wijnen, ‘Financiële sector: geïrriteerd en           32 637, Nr. 243, Vastgesteld 21 juni 2016.
         verbaasd over Dijsselbloem’, NRC Handelsblad, 19           47 See for instance the consultation about changes of
         januari 2015, http://www.nrc.nl/nieuws/2015/01/19/             the main Dutch financial law in 2016: https://www.
         financiele-sector-geirriteerd-en-verbaasd-over-dijssel-        internetconsultatie.nl/wijzigingswetfm2016/reacties
         bloem (viewed 20 January 2015).                                (viewed 19 September 2016): 9 reactions of which
     37 See @J_Dijsselbloem, @Financiën; See: https://www.              one from a citizen.
         rijksoverheid.nl/regering/inhoud/bewindspersonen/          48 Ministry of Finance, Response to questions for SOMO
         jeroen-dijsselbloem/documenten; For instance, the              research regarding transparency and weighing of inte-
         Minister gave the keynote speech on 21 April 2016 in           rests related to financial legislative processes and lob-
         Amsterdam at gala dinner of the EUROFI High Level              bying by banks, email received by SOMO on 19 July
         seminar, sponsored by ING and other internationally            2016: Response to question nr. 4 and 9.
         operating banks (https://www.rijksoverheid.nl/regering/    49 Ministry of Finance, Idem: Response to questions nr. 4,
         inhoud/bewindspersonen/jeroen-dijsselbloem/agen-               13; Annex Rabobank, paragr. 5.1.; A. van der Zwan,
         da-test/archief-agenda-2016; the speech is available           Head Public Affairs, DBA/NVB, interview with SOMO,
         on the Eurofi website (http://amsterdam2016.eurofi.            22 June 2016.
         net/sessions/gala-dinner/?t=s ) and is one of the few      50 Annex ABN AMRO, Annex ING, Annex Rabobank: para
         speeches available on governmental website:                    gr. 5.2.
         https://www.rijksoverheid.nl/documenten/toespra-           51 Ministry of Finance, Response to questions for SOMO
         ken/2016/04/22/galadiner-eurofi-seminar-in-amster-             research regarding transparency and weighing of inte-
         dam (last viewed search 20 September 2016).                    rests related to financial legislative processes and lob-
     38 Ministry of Finance, Response to questions for                  bying by banks, email received by SOMO on 19 July
         SOMO research regarding transparency and weighing              2016: Response to question nr. 15.
         of interests related to financial legislative processes    52 Ministry of Finance, Idem: Response to question nr.16.
         and lobbying by banks, email received by SOMO on           53 https://www.dutchsecuritisation.nl/sites/default/files/
         19 July 2016: Response to question nr. 4.                      documents/DSA%20responses%20to%20EC%20con-
     39 Ministry of Finance, Ibidem.                                    sultation%20on%20STS%20securitisatio%20%28fi-
     40 See amongst others: Ministry of Finance, Idem: Res-             nal%29.pdf (last viewed 7 October 2016).
         ponse to question nr. 2; See also the Minister’s answers   54 DSA, General overview of a typical Dutch true sale
         during the debate at the Parliament about the ‘CoCo-           securitisation - May 2015, https://www.dutchsecuritisa-
         gate’ (see box).                                               tion.nl/sites/default/files/documents/offering/Gene-
     41 Ministry of Finance, Idem: Response to question nr.             ral%20overview%20of%20a%20typical%20%20
         15.                                                            Dutch%20true%20sale%20securitisation%20May%20
     42 Ministry of Finance, Idem: Response to question nr.             2015%2095046-3-12353%20v2%200.pdf (Viewed 7
         10: ‘leden van koepelorganisaties zijn bekend. Wan-            October 2017).
         neer een koepelorganisatie een reactie op consul-          55 A. van der Zwan, Head Public Affairs, DBA/NVB, inter-
         tatie van voorgenomen wet- of regelgeving geeft, dan           view with SOMO, 22 June 2016.
         wordt dat gezien als een reactie van die koepelorgan-
         isatie namens al diens leden tenzij er een reden is om
         hier anders over te denken. De koepelorganisatie
         vertegenwoordigt immers haar leden.’
     43 Annex ING, paragraph 1.2; Annex SNS, paragraph 1.2.
     44 See for instance: Annex, ING, paragr. 1.1; ING Group,
         Regulation and supervision, web page, https://www.




34   A STRUCTURAL PROBLEM IN THE SHADOWS
Chapter 3

HOW ARE DUTCH BANKS
ORGANISING THEIR INFLUENCE
ON BANK REFORMS?




                             35
              Introduction1: Why do we need to know what the banks
              are doing?
awareness     More open information by Dutch banks about how they lobby and what contacts they have at the
raising for   Ministry of Finance can – along with information from the Ministry itself - provide a comprehensive
change        picture on the legislative decision-making process and whether or not decisions have been unduly
              influenced. It offers opportunities for awareness raising, future discussion and debate on issues
              such as transparency and accountability of lobbying by, amongst others, the banks themselves. It
              can lead to changes in practices of interaction and lobbying where need be. So far in the Nether-
              lands, there is little research and discussion about how and why banks should be more transparent
              and whether they should be subject to legally binding rules on their lobbying.

facilitation  This chapter examines the transparency provided by six Dutch banks researched for this report
and responsi- about their contacts, interaction, influence and lobbying at the Ministry of Finance related to
bility        upcoming banking and financial laws. It also analyses how the banks are internally organised to
              facilitate such lobbying and who bears responsibility for their lobbying positions and dealings with
              policy makers.

              This report attempts to go beyond the well-publicised incidents and media attention of lobbying
              malpractice, to investigate how these situations arose and whether they could arise again.



              Transparency and public reporting on lobbying
              How open are Dutch banks about their lobbying?

less transpar- The Dutch banks featured in this report use their websites and annual reports to publish over-
ent            views of new financial laws and regulations which might impact their operations. However, their
               2015 annual reports did not provide information about which financial authorities they have been
               approaching at the time these laws were legislated and what lobbying positions they were taking.
               The banks report according to the Global Reporting Initiative (GRI), a voluntary reporting guide2,
               which has removed since June 2014 the indicators requiring banks to give details about their lob-
               bying and interactions with authorities or policy makers.3 Overall, the research for this report, as
               explained hereafter, reveal that banks are now less transparent about their lobbying activities and
               positions than in 2014 and at the time of the previous SOMO report in 2013.4

own structure All six banks do not publish themselves information about their internal structure and staff mem-
not published bers responsible for lobbying or, as is the case for SNS Bank, whether they do not organise lobby-
              ing themselves. Banks are, additionally, members of industry associations that may represent their
              members’ interests through lobbying. The banks mention – apart from Triodos Bank5 and ASN Bank
              – that they are members of the DBA/NVB but do not provide a comprehensive list of all the other
              financial industry associations to which they belong (as explained in chapter 4). The banks also do
              not publish whether their staff is active in any of the industry associations, e.g. in developing the
              lobby position of that organisation.

              Little transparency on lobbying positions

responses to None of the six banks covered in this report clearly specify whether or when they do respond to
consultations official consultations on upcoming national or EU legislation. However, the large Dutch banks do
              engage with some of these consultations, while the smaller ones tend not to. The banks do not
              publish their full responses on their own website, except for a few available on Rabobank’s web-
              site6. They ensure though that their submissions are publically available on the consultation web-
              sites.7 When the DBA/NVB reacts on behalf of its member banks to national, EU or international
              financial consultations, it uses its website to publish the full responses, often introduced by a short
              summary. None of the six banks nor the DBA/NVB publish the submissions that are made via the



36            A STRUCTURAL PROBLEM IN THE SHADOWS
               industry associations of which they are member (see also chapter 4). Given that the memberships
               are not fully transparent, it is hard to track and link the banks with the lobbying positions of the
               industry associations.

briefings on   A few banks publish positions in broad terms regarding a small number of topics and legislations.
positions      Rabobank publishes some general position papers on its website – though these are not easy to
               find.8 In response to stakeholders wishing to have easy, accessible information, ING now publish-
               es ‘viewpoints’ on its website; these are short general briefings on issues with which it is actively
               involved. These viewpoints and position papers, however, do not cover all the issues on which the
               bank lobbies nor the details that can be found in their consultation responses.9 None of the banks,
               for instance, published their (direct or indirect) position on STS securitisation (see also chapter 4).

more details   In contrast to the positions on the websites or annual reports, the responses submitted to consul-
               tations contain precise recommendations supported by detailed data along with assessments of the
               possible negative impacts on the banks of upcoming regulations. Publication of all such submis-
               sions by the banks themselves would significantly increase transparency about the banks’ lobbying
               positions on upcoming legislation since many citizens and stakeholders are not aware when and
               on what issues official consultations are being held. It would also allow analyses to be made of the
               impact of the banks’ positions on the banks’ stakeholders and society.

               Do banks and their lobbyists need to register?

Dutch regis-   Lobbying undertaken by the banking sector would be more transparent if official registration of
tration        representation and lobbying were required. For Dutch banks, there are hardly any official registra-
               tion requirements. In the Netherlands, as is the case for any company, only one person per bank
               can be registered with the Dutch parliament and receive a permanent pass that allows him/her
               easy access to parliament.10

EU registra-   At EU level, four Dutch banks as well as the DBA/NVB11 are registered on the EU’s Transparency
tion           Register; ASN Bank and SNS Bank do not lobby at that level. The EU Transparency Register12 is,
               however, voluntary and no organisation is legally obliged so far to give complete and correct in-
               formation. 13 When registering, companies and organisations are asked to provide: information on
               what kind of policies they are reacting to, the names of those lobbying and/or accredited for access
               to the European Parliament, details of memberships of industry associations, the costs of lobbying
               and representation, etc. The information provided to the Register by ING Group, Rabobank, ABN
               AMRO, Triodos Bank and DBA/NVB is either not fully accurate, not complete or not up to date.14

               How much do banks spend on lobbying?

no informa-    Following on from chapter 2, it is evident that the banking sector has a well-resourced capacity
tion available to monitor, interact and lobby the Ministry of Finance. In their public accounts, the banks give no
               figure for the overall cost and expenditure of lobbying, let alone specifying how much is spent on
               lobbying the Dutch Ministry of Finance. There is also no breakdown of the operational costs (staff-
               ing costs etc.) of the unit within the bank responsible for lobbying and relations with governments,
               and no details of the fees paid to industry associations that lobby on their members’ behalf. Many
               different bank units and divisions contribute to developing and advocating lobbying positions, in-
               cluding board members with their own budgets. Lobbying also takes place in the different countries
               where the bank operates and is paid for by managers and staff out of their local budgets. In some
               of these countries, the cost of national bank industry associations is estimated to be moderate.

               It became apparent to SOMO during the interviews for this report that an overview of all these
               costs is not known even to those in the bank responsible for government liaison and lobbying. This
               means that no one - including the banks and the Ministry of Finance - is fully aware of the financial
               capacity of Dutch banks’ lobbying.

               The DBA/NVB also does not publish information about its expenditure on lobbying. In 2012, its


                                                                                                                    37
              total budget was estimated to be approximately €14 million with the three major banks paying the
              majority of costs.15 ING alone pays an annual membership fee of approximately €3 million.16

rough esti-   The EU’s Transparency Register asks registered banks to estimate how much they spend on rep-
mates         resentation and lobbying EU institutions. This offers some transparency. ABN AMRO, ING and
              Rabobank reported that in 2015 they each spent between €400,000 and €499,999.17 Triodos Bank
              reported to the register that it spent between €10,000 and €24,999 on such activities in 201418
              and a consultant mentioned that Triodos was a client paying between €50,000 and €99,99919.
              Representatives from these banks admit that these figures are only very rough estimates.20 The
              DBA/NVB estimated its costs at EU level are between €700,000 and €799,999 in 2014.21



              How the banks internally operationalise their lobbying
              Do Dutch banks have a policy on lobbying?

not compre-   Dutch banks do not have a comprehensive policy on lobbying that is publically available. A com-
hensive       prehensive lobbying policy would encompass aspects such as: a vision and definition of lobbying,
              transparency of lobbying activities and positions, the integrity of the in-house lobbyists and the
              lobbyists of the associations they belong to, the choice of membership of industry associations,
              the weighing of interests when developing a lobbying position, whether lobbying is part of the CSR
              policy, how lobbying by staff and board members is coordinated, the costs of, lobbying and the per-
              son(s) finally responsible and accountable for all lobbying strategies and positions.

own vision    The large banks’ own visions on lobbying guides their activities. Rabobank believes that lobbying
              is legitimate, an opportunity and necessary to inform decision-makers and policymakers about the
              impact of new legislative and/or policy proposals so that such proposals are effective, efficient and
              feasible.22 ING describes lobbying as ‘public advocacy’23 and associates it not only with influencing
              regulation but also with initiating discussions. ASN Bank24 defines lobbying as each activity that
              seeks to direct policy and decisions by a public authority or institution towards a particular objec-
              tive or result. It considers lobbying on legislative proposals a top-down approach that it does not
              want to take. ASN Bank only very occasionally lobbies to promote those sustainability issues which
              are its focus (human rights, bio-diversity, climate). Its investment policy prohibits to invest in com-
              panies that lobby against the sustainability issues ASN Bank supports.

own princi-   Most Dutch banks do, however, incorporate parts of their other policies and principles into their
ples          lobbying activities, as described below. After an update of its website, ING explained such policies
              and principles of its ‘public advocacy’ as part of its approach to transparency, relationship with
              authorities and civil society, membership of industry associations, and codes of conduct related to
              lobbying.25

              How do banks safeguard the integrity of their lobbyists?

non-legally   One way to avoid unwarranted lobbying and undue influence is to apply codes of conduct. In the
binding codes Netherlands, there is no legally binding code of conduct which guarantees the integrity of lobby-
of conduct    ists. None of the banks have their own code of conduct on lobbying and representation. Bank lob-
              byists are subject to codes of conduct applicable to all staff of the bank, such as national guidelines
              on bank behaviour, the Dutch voluntary bankers’ oath26, and their own behaviour guidelines on
              dealing with visitors, participating in events, etc. Some lobbyists of the large Dutch banks belong
              to the Dutch27 or European28 industry associations for lobbyists. These associations have devel-
              oped their own code of conduct and want their members to apply it, though this is self-regulated
              and self-enforced. It is not clear whether banks require that all in-house lobbyists adhere to any of
              these voluntary codes. The banks’ many experts and its board members do not subscribe to these
              industry codes.

EU code       The three biggest Dutch banks, Triodos Bank and the DBA/NVB have at least one lobbyist regis-


38            A STRUCTURAL PROBLEM IN THE SHADOWS
                tered on the European Transparency Register, which automatically means a commitment to adhere
                to the Register’s code of conduct.29

                How are banks organised internally?

                How the six banks covered in this report operationalise the organisation of their lobbying should
                provide some insight into the method they lobby and the effectiveness of their interactions with,
                and lobbying of, the Ministry of Finance.

diverse inter- The six Dutch banks are all organised differently with regard to lobbying. ABN AMRO has a Gov-
nal organisa- ernmental Affairs Unit which includes two lobbyists and is part of its Regulatory Office.30 Rabobank
tion           employs four in-house lobbyists in its Public Affairs office and has six persons who are registered
               at the BVPA, the Dutch association for lobbyists.31 ING has a ‘Regulatory and International Affairs’
               department with 17 staff members in the Netherlands, Germany, Belgium and Brussels (EU insti-
               tutions).32 SNS Bank abolished its lobby unit at the beginning of 2016, mainly because of lack of
               capacity; it now mainly lobbies via the DBA/NVB.33 ASN Bank (which is part of SNS Bank) does not
               have a lobby unit. Triodos Bank has itself no capacity to lobby but has hired a consultant to lobby
               at EU level. The CEO of Triodos Bank, Peter Blom, represents the small banks and not Triodos Bank
               within the DBA/NVB board.34

no full coordi- The lobbying units of the three largest banks – ABN AMRO, ING and Rabobank – do not decide on
nation          their bank’s lobbying positions but coordinate their development within the bank, organise their
                distribution, and ensure bank representatives meet the appropriate decision-makers at ministerial
                or parliamentary level. They are not the only ones involved in lobbying since other staff and ex-
                perts from within (and outside) the bank also monitor, analyse and assess the impact of upcoming
                regulation, and advise on possible lobbying positions. The banks’ experts sometimes have direct
                contact with the Ministry of Finance. The chairs of management boards and/or CEOs of the banks,
                for example, sometimes communicate directly with the Minister of Finance. Not all these activities,
                however, are in practice fully coordinated and overseen by the lobbying units of the banks.

internal        Moreover, the subsidiaries of banks that operate globally – such as ABN AMRO, ING and Rabobank
variations      – may be part of a domestic lobby group which takes positions that the lobby unit at the bank’s
                headquarters might be unaware of. In case lobbying positions differ from country to country, the
                bank must decide on a position that reflects its international operation and that of all its subsidiar-
                ies.

strategies      Once a final position is decided, the bank staff of governmental affairs or lobby units may engage
                in networking, monitoring, information exchange and all kind of lobbying through all available com-
                munication channels.

                How do other organisations lobby on behalf of the banks in the Netherlands?

DBA/NVB         One of the channels through which banks organise their lobby in the Netherlands – not just the
                Ministry of Finance – is the DBA/NVB. This banking association plays an important role in liaising
                between the banking sector and the Ministry of Finance and in presenting a joint position on up-
                coming financial regulation.

Dutch coordi- Dutch banks prefer to state their position, respond to official internet consultations and engage in
nation ...    lobbying on legislation towards the Ministry of Finance via the DBA/NVB because its compromise
              positions gives them more legitimacy. In coming to a position, the DBA/NVB weighs up the various
              interests of its members and stakeholders. It spends roughly estimated about 60 per cent of its
              work in contacting and coordinating members35 through different working groups and in supporting
              decision-making at the board.

... not fully   Rabobank believes its principle opinions are, generally speaking, reflected by the position of indus-
                try associations.36 ING has however stated that even though it has contributed to discussions with-


                                                                                                                    39
                in industry associations to which it belongs, the final position does not always reflect its position.37
                SNS Bank is only represented through the DBA/NVB although it might not always fully agree with
                the position taken.38 Since ING and Rabobank operate in many countries, they may also present
                their views separately so as to reflect the wider interests of their international operations.

position lob-   Once a position has been decided, lobbyists at the member banks, DBA/NVB staff and perhaps
bying           even board members from the member banks, begin expressing this position and lobbying the Min-
                istry of Finance (see chapter 2). DBA/NVB lobbyists and in-house lobbyists from its member banks
                meet every six to eight weeks in their own working group.39

other lobby-    For specific issues, the Dutch banks can use other channels to influence the Ministry of Finance.
ing organisa-   The banks are, for example, members of other Dutch financial industry associations, such as the
tions           Dutch Fund and Asset Management Association (DUFAS: Triodos Bank, ASN Bank), the Dutch Se-
                curitisation Association (DSA: ABN AMRO, ING, SNS Bank, Rabobank) and the Dutch Association
                of Covered Bonds Issuers (DACB: ABN AMRO, ING, SNS Bank) which lobby directly or indirectly
                on their behalf. Bank representatives may be on the association’s board or in their working groups.
                For example, an ING representative is Treasurer on the Dutch Securitisation Association’s board of
                directors.40

                Who makes the final decision on lobbying?

accounta-       Given the many persons involved in lobbying and the many lobbying channels used, it is important
bility          to identify who is finally responsible at each bank for lobbying positions and activities. This person
                would also be accountable for cases of undue lobbying should they come to public attention.

different       At the large Dutch banks, decisions on important lobbying positions are taken at management
levels          board level, supported by the lobby units as well as experts and managers responsible for the
                topics covered. Sometimes, the decision is taken at the level of the experts at the bank, or by the
                board member responsible for that particular issue. For instance, at SNS Bank, the experts might
                develop and promote a position, while at ING, specific committees with support from the bank’s
                lobby unit, advise the board prior to it taking a decision.

the CEO         All the banks involved in this report confirmed that the ultimate responsibility for all decisions lies
                with the chair of the management board (also referred to as the CEO). At ING, the Supervisory
                Board is consulted before official regulatory positions are communicated externally.

DBA/NVB         At the DBA/NVB, a committee of experts sometimes decides a lobbying position. When the is-
board           sue is particularly important, the findings of the committee or working group are presented to the
                board of directors who take the final decision. The chair of the management board of each of the
                five banks discussed in this report sits on the DBA/NVB board (see box 3 on page 27).41

not full        In principle, chairs from the management board of the six banks are responsible and accountable
awareness       for the positions taken by bank industry associations of which they are a member. Given, however,
                the lack of awareness among the banks of their membership of these organisations (see chapter
                4), it is unlikely that the chairs are familiar with all the positions taken and their responsibility to be
                accountable for these decisions.



                Weighing of interests: Is lobbying considered a corporate
                social responsibility (CSR)?
impact and      The lobbying process by banks can influence law making bodies and, therefore, the laws that reg-
potentially     ulate bank behaviour in the economy and in society. Lobbying should therefore, be considered a
harmful         corporate social responsibility issue and a sustainability issue.42 For instance, could bank lobbying
                prevent regulations prohibiting the financing of environmentally harmful activities? Excessive lob-



40              A STRUCTURAL PROBLEM IN THE SHADOWS
              bying that results in regulatory capture and prioritises the interests of banks above those of the
              society can have disruptive and damaging consequences for citizens and the public interest. If lob-
              bying were considered as a CSR policy, any lobbying that harmed the public interest, the economy,
              the environment, society and individual citizens would be prevented.

little policy Lobbying and interaction with legislators is, however, not included in the public information issued
and reporting by most Dutch banks on their CSR policies and work, although they all report on their CSR activ-
              ities and how important they are. The exception is ASN Bank, which mentions that lobbying is a
              CSR issue and that disproportionate lobbying can have disruptive effects. It expects the companies
              it invests in not to lobby against the sustainability criteria it focuses on, e.g. not be part of the an-
              ti-climate lobby. ASN Bank also wants companies to be transparent about how much they spend on
              lobbying and/or political contributions.43 Triodos Bank considers all its policies and activities to be
              socially responsible, including lobbying without explicitly mentioning so.44

stakeholders’ While ABN AMRO, ING, Rabobank, and SNS Bank do not explicitly consider lobbying as a CSR
interests     issue and have no explicit CSR policy related to it, they claim to take into account CSR interests
              when developing a lobbying position. ING states that the interests of its stakeholders ‘invariably
              serve as our guideline in determining our positions with regard to regulatory and supervisory de-
              velopments.’45 For Rabobank, lobbying and influencing the regulatory processes is a regular staff
              function that deals with issues resulting from political decision making processes, public policy
              processes and public debates.46 ABN AMRO admits that its positions are influenced by its remit of
              profit making and strengthening its capital buffers.47 SNS Bank insists, at the DBA/NVB, that the
              banks’ positions promote the clients’ interests.48

weighing of   It is not clear how in practice the different perspectives of bank stakeholders are weighed by the
interests     banks and by the industry associations. It is also uncertain whether conflicts of interest between
              the profit making remit of the bank and the best interests of its stakeholders are really being prop-
              erly resolved: Do the lobby units and CSR units of the banks always align their positions? ING
              states that it carefully weighs up the interests of all parties concerned and aligns its business pro-
              cesses and strategy as best as it can with the expectations of its stakeholders.49 All the banks know
              quite well that slanting information in their interest, provided by staff or experts to policy makers,
              will undermine their credibility and potential future influence.



              How banks organise their lobbying - Conclusions
              Failing transparency

              For the public and for stakeholders in the six Dutch banks, there is scant published information
              by the banks about their lobbying activities and the many formal and informal interactions they
              have with the Ministry of Finance related to upcoming financial legislative proposals. There are no
              reporting standards or binding official obligations for the banks to make such information public.
              While the voluntary EU Transparency register makes some information public, it is incomplete.
              Consequently, it is difficult to have a full picture of the banks’ activities and make an assessment of
              whether interaction and lobbying has influenced the Ministry of Finance and if the interests of the
              banks have been prioritised over other (public) interests. This is especially relevant in the context
              of EU financial legislative proposals on which the Minister of Finance co-decides but does not hold
              official consultations.

              Furthermore, the banks themselves do not publish their own detailed position papers and/or lob-
              bying documents such as their responses to official consultations (Rabobank is the exception as it
              publishes a few). In contrast the DBA/NVB consultation responses are accessible on its website.50
              Publishing consultation submissions would allow banks to be directly transparent about what legis-
              lative processes they are involved in and what interests they perceive to be at stake. The currently
              publicly available position briefings or viewpoints by ING and Rabobank do not sufficiently cover
              the range of issues on which the banks are lobbying.


                                                                                                                    41
     Significant lobbying apparatus at the disposal of large banks

     The extent of the lobbying capacity of the banks is currently not made transparent. The amount
     they spend on interacting with, and lobbying, policy decision-makers - let alone the Ministry of
     Finance - is not even known to the banks themselves, apart from a few figures and these are esti-
     mates.

     Research for this report revealed that the three large Dutch banks (ABN AMRO, ING and Rabo-
     bank) have special dedicated units, with different levels of capacity, which develop relationships
     with policy-makers and coordinate part of the lobbying positions and activities. In addition, many
     in-house experts, sometimes at top management level, can be involved in lobbying. The banks’
     lobbying activity is strongly reinforced by their membership of the DBA/NVB. SNS Bank and Trio-
     dos Bank have no units with in-house lobbyists and undertake hardly any activity around financial
     legislative proposals but mainly participate through the DBA/NVB, so their views on sustainability
     issues are less heard.

     Full transparency about the human and financial resources available to banks which allow them to
     network and lobby, as well as monitor and assess upcoming legislation would raise awareness at
     the Ministry of Finance and in society, as well as at the banks, about the differing abilities of stake-
     holders to give inputs, and the consequent imbalances. Such awareness might encourage measures
     to be taken that would promote better democratic decision-making (see also recommendations at
     the end of this report).

     Lobbying policies and responsibilities not well-defined

     None of the banks covered in this report has a public and comprehensive policy on lobbying. ING
     has clarified its principles and approach to ‘public advocacy’, but there is still no information on
     lobbying expenditure and responsibility for lobbying positions.

     Despite the effects of financial regulation on the economy and society the large banks have no
     corporate social responsibility (CSR) policy on lobbying. They do state, however, that they take into
     account and balance the interests of their stakeholders (including shareholders) with the interests
     of the bank, where possible. How that is done, and how the conflicts of interests with their prof-
     it-making remit are being dealt with, are not always clear from the position papers published on
     official consultation websites.

     Some of those who lobby on behalf of banks are subject to specific codes of conduct that should
     safeguard the integrity of their lobbying, but these codes are voluntary and do not apply to all bank
     lobbyists.

     Lastly, it is clear that the final decision-making power and responsibility for the bank’s lobbying
     positions and activities lies with the chair of the bank’s board (also often referred to as the CEO).
     This person is, therefore, also accountable for excessive and irresponsible lobbying or lobbying that
     harms society and the public interest in case it would occur. However not all lobbying positions are
     decided at CEO level, lobby activities and positions in diverse countries are often not fully coordi-
     nated and the CEO does not know all the lobbying that is undertaken by the industry associations
     of which the bank is a member. This results in the responsibility and accountability of lobbying be-
     ing badly managed, and in a lack of control of the banking lobbying apparatus.




42   A STRUCTURAL PROBLEM IN THE SHADOWS
Notes

1   If not mentioned otherwise, the information of this
    chapter is based on research per bank (ABN AMRO,              14 See for instance the register of ING (http://ec.europa.
    ING, Rabobank, Triodos Bank, SNS Bank and its sub-                eu/transparencyregister/public/consultation/
    sidiary ASN Bank) summarised in the Annexes on the                displaylobbyist.do?id=12112965774-95 (viewed
    SOMO website accompanying this report, and on an                  23 September 2016)), Rabobank (http://ec.europa.eu/
    interview with the DBA/NVB.                                       transparencyregister/public/consultation/displaylobbyist.
2   Global Reporting Initiative (GRI), G4 Sustainability              do?id=006687715492-92 (viewed 23 September
    Reporting Guidelines, 2013 and updated August 2015,               2016)), and DBA/NVB (http://ec.europa.eu/transpa-
    https://www.globalreporting.org/information/g4/Pages/             rencyregister/public/consultation/displaylobbyist.
    default.aspx (last viewed 7 October 2016).                        do?id=51894741860-19).
3   Global Reporting Initiative (GRI), G4 Sustainability          15 F. de Bruijn, ‘NVB: conflict banken is binnenbrandje’,
    Reporting Guidelines – Implementation Manual, August              BNR (website), 4 October 2012, http://www.bnr.nl/
    2016, p. 209, https://www.globalreporting.org/re-                 nieuws/beurs/10127295/nvb-conflict-banken-is-bin-
    sourcelibrary/GRIG4-Part2-Implementation-Manual.pdf               nenbrandje (viewed 20 August 2016).
    (viewed 7 October 2016): only the manual still makes          16 Annex ING, paragr. 1.4.
    some requirement to report ‘the participation in public       17 Transparency Register: ABN AMRO (http://ec.europa.
    policy development and lobbying’.                                 eu/transparencyregister/public/consultation/displaylob-
4   R. van Tilburg, I. Römgens, Taking Lobbying Public,               byist.do?id=469301912859-01), ING (http://ec.europa.
    SOMO, December 2013: see pages 45-48, 55, appendix                eu/transparencyregister/public/consultation/display-
    II; See also the Annexes to this report on each of the            lobbyist.do?id=12112965774-95), and Rabobank (http://
    banks published on the SOMO website.                              ec.europa.eu/transparencyregister/public/consultation/
5   https://www.triodos.com/en/about-triodos-bank/who-                displaylobbyist.do?id=006687715492-92).
    we-are/networks-and-partners/ (viewed 10 October              18 http://ec.europa.eu/transparencyregister/public/consul-
    2015).                                                            tation/displaylobbyist.do?id=543556311400-69 (viewed
6   https://www.rabobank.com/en/about-rabobank/in-soci-               23 September 2016): no information was given for
    ety/principles/index.html (viewed 6 October 2016): it is          2015.
    not clear whether this provides a full overview.              19 http://ec.europa.eu/transparencyregister/public/consul-
7   ING Annex, paragr. 2.3., Rabobank Annex, paragr. 2.1.             tation/displaylobbyist.do?id=785976617848-15 (viewed
8   https://www.rabobank.com/en/about-rabobank/in-so-                 23 September 2016).
    ciety/principles/index.html (viewed 6 October 2016):          20 See Annex ING, paragr. 1.4.; Annex ABN AMRO, para-
    these are not easy to find and it is not clear whether this       gr.1.4.
    provides a full overview of all positions submitted.          21 http://ec.europa.eu/transparencyregister/public/consul-
9   ING Annex, paragr. 2.1., 2.3.; ING Group N.V., Regula-            tation/displaylobbyist.do?id=51894741860-19: The
    tion and Supervision, website page https://www.ing.               Dutch Banking Association.
    com/ING-in-Society/Sustainability/Stakeholder-engage-         22 Annex Rabobank, paragr. 4.1.
    ment/Regulation-and-Supervision.htm (last viewed              23 See website: https://www.ing.com/ING-in-Society/Sus-
    7 October 2016).                                                  tainability/Stakeholder-engagement/Regulation-and-Su-
10 https://www.tweedekamer.nl/over_de_tweede_kamer/                   pervision.htm
    lobbyistenregister (last viewed 23 September 2016).           24 ASN Bank, Beleid over goed bestuur en ethisch hande-
11 http://ec.europa.eu/transparencyregister/public/consul-            len van ondernemingen - Goedgekeurd 23 juni 2015,
    tation/displaylobbyist.do?id=51894741860-19 (last                 June 2015, p. 10-11, http://www.asnbank.nl/algemeen/
    viewed 7 October 2016): Dutch Banking Association.                duurzaamheid/duurzaamheidsbeleid/beleidsdocumen-
12 See the EU Transparency website for more information:              ten.html (viewed 7 October 2016).
    http://ec.europa.eu/transparencyregister/public/home-         25 See: https://www.ing.com/ING-in-Society/Sustainability/
    Page.do?redir=false&locale=en (viewed 23 September                Stakeholder-engagement/Regulation-and-Supervision.
    2016).                                                            htm (last viewed 7 October 2016).
13 See amongst others Corporate Europe Observatory’s              26 See for an overview of the codes: https://www.nvb.nl/
    different articles on the EU transparency register at             thema-s/bank-maatschappij/4819/cultuur-en-gedrag.
    https://corporateeurope.org/tags/transparency-register;           html and https://www.nvb.nl/publicaties-standpunten/
    Transparency International’s information about EU lob-            publicaties/1623/code-banken-banking-code.html (last
    bying and the EU Transparency Register: http://www.               viewed 23 September 2016).
    transparencyinternational.eu/focus_areas/lob-                 27 For more information, see: www.bvpa.nl: Beroepsvereni-
    bying-the-eu/?gclid=CJ_67I34rM8CFYky0wod_ywIxw                    ging voor Public Affairs (BVPA), i.e. industry association
    (viewed 23 September 2016).                                       for public affairs.



                                                                                                                               43
     28 For more information see: www.seap.be : Society of
         European Affairs Professionals (SEAP).
     29 The code of conduct of the Transparency Register can
         be viewed at: http://ec.europa.eu/transparencyregister/
         public/homePage.do (last viewed 23 September 2016).
     30 Annex ABN AMRO, paragr. 1.1.
     31 Annex Rabobank, paragr. 1.
     32 Annex ING, paragr. 1.1.
     33 Annex SNS Bank, paragr. 1.1.
     34 Annex Triodos bank, paragr. 1.
     35 A. van der Zwan, Head Public Affairs, DBA/NVB,
         interview with SOMO, 22 June 2016.
     36 Annex Rabobank, paragr. 1.2.
     37 Annex ING, paragr. 1.2.
     38 Annex SNS Bank, paragr. 1.1.
     39 Annex ABN AMRO, paragr. 3.2.
     40 Annex ING, paragr. 3.2.
     41 https://www.nvb.nl/vereniging/118/bestuur.html or
         https://www.nvb.nl/en/association/274/board.html
         (viewed 21 July 2016).
     42 See also: R. van Tilburg, I. Römgens, Taking Lobbying
         Public, SOMO, December 2013. P. 30-31, 52.
     43 ASN Bank, Beleid over goed bestuur en ethisch hande-
         len van ondernemingen - Goedgekeurd 23 juni 2015,
         June 2015, p. 10-11.
     44 Annex Triodos Bank.
     45 https://www.ing.com/ING-in-Society/Sustainability/
         Stakeholder-engagement/Regulation-and-Supervision.
         htm; see also: http://www.ing.com/ING-in-Society/Sus
         tainability/Our-Stance/Transparency.htm (last viewed 10
         October 2016): in all countries we do business in ING
         aims to improve supervision and regulation ‘in a way
         that supports the interests of our stakeholders (including
         customers) to the fullest extent possible’.
     46 Annex Rabobank, paragr. 4.1.
     47 Annex ABN AMRO, paragr. 4.2.
     48 Annex SNS Bank, paragr. 3
     49 https://www.ing.com/ING-in-Society/Sustainability/Sta-
         keholder-engagement/Regulation-and-Supervision.htm.
     50 https://www.nvb.nl/publicaties-standpunten/100/publi-
         caties.html




44   A STRUCTURAL PROBLEM IN THE SHADOWS
Chapter 4

UNAWARENESS ABOUT BANKS’
MEMBERSHIP OF MULTIPLE IN-
DUSTRY ASSOCIATIONS




                             45
                Introduction1: The importance of EU financial laws on na-
                tional legislation
international   National financial legislation in the Netherlands is often first shaped at international level and then
and EU deci-    legislated at EU level. The Basel Committee on Banking Supervision, for example, sets international
sions           banking standards. EU laws based on those standards to regulate the banking sector can determine
                most of the national financial law through EU ‘directives’ while EU ‘regulations’ are directly applica-
                ble to member states.

                Successful lobbying by banks at international and EU level, therefore, can influence national legis-
                lation.

chain of lob-   Some of the Dutch banks lobby at EU and international level, but most of that lobbying happens
bying           through membership of financial industry associations. In order to have a full insight of the lobby-
                ing of the Dutch banks and its potential impact on Dutch financial legislation, this chapter looks at
                the way they lobby through multiple memberships.



                The role of European and international financial industry
                associations
various finan- Dutch banks are members of many different European and international financial industry associa-
cial industry tions. Most of these financial industry associations focus on specific areas of banking or the finan-
associations cial markets, such as asset management or issuing bonds. They ensure that their members’ interests
               are promoted and protected in proposed international standards or EU legislation, by responding
               to official consultations and by a range of lobbying activities. Some associations also facilitate the
               exchange of information and expertise among members. The lobbying can take place both formally
               and informally using letters, face-to-face meetings with civil servants and parliamentarians, etc. Be-
               ing a member of such an association, therefore, enables banks to influence policy, standard setting
               and law at international and EU national level.

associations’   The large Dutch banks are also member of some national banking associations in other EU coun-
membership      tries. These national associations often not only lobby at national level but also at EU level, as is
of associa-     the case with the DBA/NVB. Moreover, each of the national banking associations is member of the
tions           European Banking Federation, which is a very active intervener at the EU institutions. Remarkably,
                some financial industry associations are also member of other financial industry associations.2


                Banks’ invisible membership of industry associations
no full over-   While information about membership of industry associations is listed in the six Dutch banks’ 2015
sight           annual reports and websites, not all memberships are mentioned by the banks, with some more
                transparent than others (see graph 1). Research of the industry associations that responded to offi-
                cial EC and international consultations reveals that Dutch banks are also member of some of those
                associations (see graph 2 and Annexes), which mention on their website details about which banks
                are members or associate members. The European Transparency Register requires banks to list
                ‘membership of any associations/(con)federations/networks or other bodies’, but the information
                submitted by the Dutch banks now appears incomplete based on the research for this report.3

GRI reporting Although the six Dutch banks report according to the Global Reporting Initiative (GRI), they do not
              reveal all memberships when fulfilling the requirement of the GRI’s G 4-16 guideline to list mem-
              berships of (industry) associations and national or international advocacy organisations.4

                Without knowing all the industry associations to which the Dutch banks belong, and how actively
                involved they are in the association, it is impossible to know what position on a range of banking or



46              A STRUCTURAL PROBLEM IN THE SHADOWS
impact not    financial legislative issues are being promoted in their name and how that might ultimately impact
known         on Dutch rules and society.

              The graph below shows the number of industry associations the six Dutch banks under review in
              this report belong to respectively, and whether they are transparent about this membership on
              their websites and in their 2015 annual reports.



graph 1       Dutch banks transparency about memberships
              of financial industry associations (2015-August 2016)                                 ING

                                                                                                    14




                                                                                                    21




  visible




                                                                        ABN AMRO BANK
                                                                                        RABO BANK

                                        TRIODOS BANK
                                                             SNS BANK
                      ASN BANK
                                                                                         3
                                                              2
                       1                      1                          1


                                                                                                     3

                                              5               5



  invisible



                    Mentioned in 2015 annual report, GRI
                    table or on the bank’s website

                    Not mentioned in 2015 annual report,
                    GRI table, but mentioned on the bank’s
                    website after the SOMO interviews
                    June-July 2016                                                       17
                    Not mentioned in 2015 annual report,
                    GRI table or on the bank’s website
                                                                          19




              Sources: Official websites of consultations on financial legislative proposals, websites of financial indus-
              try associations and related organizations (in EU and international), the banks’ 2015 annual reports,
              2015 GRI indexes (G4-16) and websites (see Annexes to this report on SOMO’s website)


                                                                                                                        47
                ASN Bank is 100% owned by SNS Bank but has an independent bank permit and operates an independ-
                ent lobby strategy. From 1 January 2017 onwards, SNS and ASN Bank will each operate under one bank
                permit, called the Volksbank N.V.


                Unaccountable membership of industry associations
unaware of      The lack of transparency about all banks’ membership of industry associations was not necessarily
all member-     down to a reluctance to share information but rather a lack of awareness about all their member-
ships           ships of such organisations, and even, sometimes, their existence.5 Following SOMO’s research, all
                banks said they would investigate these memberships further with a view to providing more public
                information. Subsequently, ING updated, on the Regulation and Supervision page of its website, its
                disclosure of membership of those industry associations that it finds relevant to its lobbying activi-
                ties (see the dark oker bar in graph 1).6

different       Bank representatives also stated that they were not always actively engaged with all industry asso-
goals and       ciations - even if they were a member – and that influencing public policy was not necessarily the
opinions        goal of membership anyway. Membership of the British Banking Association (BBA), for example, is
                a requirement for banks engaging in banking activity in the UK. However, the BBA is also heavily
                involved in lobbying.7 ING states that standpoints of the industry associations it is member of are
                not necessarily identical to those of ING as these associations themselves weigh up the various
                interests of their members and other stakeholders.8

level of en-
                Importantly, it is not clear – to public and government – to what degree members actively develop
gagement
                and sign on to the associations’ positions. The Dutch Ministry of Finance considers associations to
                speak in the name of their members.9 It might not always be clear to the CEO who is responsible
                and accountable for the lobbying positions of the bank, what is being is being said in the bank’s
                name.


                The case about STS securitisation: the industry associa-
                tions’ responses to the EC consultation
indirect re-    A closer look at the 2015 EC consultation on new EU legislation for simple, transparent and stand-
sponses         ardised (STS) securitisation (see also chapters one and two)10 reveals how active industry associ-
                ations are in lobbying at EU level. In this consultation the EC sought ‘to gather information and
                views from stakeholders on the current functioning of European securitisation markets and how
                the EU legal framework can be improved to create a sustainable market for high-quality securitisa-
                tion’.11

                Dutch banks were members of many of the industry associations that responded. An overview of
                these memberships is shown in graph 2.

multiple lob-   Because of their membership of several industry associations, some Dutch banks were able to re-
bying chan-     spond multiple times to this consultation. Rabobank for example, belongs to seven financial indus-
nels            try associations that separately responded to the consultation, and ABN AMRO is member of six
                such organisations. Through these organisations, ING responded nine times. In total, Dutch banks
                (either individually, via the DBA/NVB or through industry associations) were represented for more
                than ten per cent of all consultation responses. SNS Bank for instance did not know how it was
                indirectly lobbying on STS securitisation.12




48              A STRUCTURAL PROBLEM IN THE SHADOWS
graph 2        Responses to the 2015 EC consultation on STS securitisation by industry associations
               of which Dutch banks and DBA/NVB are member


                                                                                                   Mentioned in 2015 annual report, GRI
                                                                                                   table or on the bank’s website

                                                                                                   Not mentioned in 2015 annual report,
                                                                                                   GRI table, but mentioned on the bank’s
                                    ING                                                            website after the SOMO interviews
                                                                                                   June-July 2016
                                    3
                                                                                                   Not mentioned in 2015 annual report,
                                                                                                   GRI table or on the bank’s website



                                    5



                                                             RABOBANK
                                                                         TRIODOS BANK
    visible


                                                                                        SNS BANK

                        DBA/NVB                  ABN AMRO                                                     ASN BANK
                                                             1                          1

                                    1                                                                        0

                        2                                                2              2

   invisible




                                                6            6



               Source: http://ec.europa.eu/finance/consultations/2015/securitisation/index_en.htm and websites of
               the associations mentioned.




box 5             INDIRECT POSITIONING ABOUT STS SECURITISATION, THE EXAMPLE OF ABN
                  AMRO

                  According to ABN AMRO13, the position of ABN AMRO related to simple, transparent and stand-
                  ardised (STS) securitisation has been provided by the Dutch Securitisation Association (DSA) and
                  the Association for Financial Markets in Europe (AFME). Both organisations published the response
                  to the EC’s consultation on its website.14

                  According to SOMO’s research of ABN AMRO’s memberships and all the responses to the EC
                  consultation15, ABN AMRO also responded through the British Banking Association (BBA), the In-
                  ternational Capital Markets Association (ICMA), the Luxembourg Bankers’ Association (LBA), and
                  even more indirectly for instance through the European Mortgage Federation (EMF) of which the
                  DBA/NVB is member16 and the German Banking Industry Committee (GBIC) which is the voice of
                  the leading German banking-sector associations, including the Association of German Banks (Bun-
                  desverband deutscher Banken (BdB))17 of which ABN AMRO is member.

                  ABN AMRO provided input to the Basel Committee on Banking Supervision’s second consultation
                  on securitisation18 via its membership of the DBA/NVB19, which is itself a member of the Europe-
                  an Banking Federation (EBF) which also submitted a response to the consultation. 20 The EBF is, in
                  turn, a member of the International Banking Federation 21 which responded to the consultation too.




                                                                                                                                        49
                 ABN AMRO also contributed indirectly through its membership of IACPM (International Associa-
                 tion of Credit Portfolio Managers)22, and in a joint letter from many associations23, including some
                 (AFME, IIF, and ISDA) of which ABN AMRO is a member. 24

                 This means that ABN AMRO has the capacity to exercise strong influence on the consultation
                 through many different organisations without that being visible to the EC, the Ministry of Finance,
                 the public and probably even the CEO of the bank.




hearing the   The EC claims that consultations allow it to hear the concerns of citizens and stakeholders at the
same voices   beginning of the legislative process, but the evidence suggests it is listening to the same voices
              over and over again. Moreover, this was not fully transparent because the Dutch banks were not
              mentioning all their memberships of these associations at the time of the consultation. Following
              the responses, the EC stated that on the whole, ‘the consultation indicated that the priority should
              be to develop an EU-wide framework for simple, transparent and standardised securitization’.25



              Conclusion and comments
              There is insufficient public information available to trace the chain of influence exerted by Dutch
              banks on national legislation through lobbying at EU and international level. While the banks have
              some direct representation at EU level (see chapter three), they are also members of industry asso-
              ciations that lobby on their behalf at EU and international level. Not all of these memberships are
              mentioned publicly by the banks.

              It is of concern that banks are often unaware of some of their membership of such industry asso-
              ciations, the lobbying work undertaken by these associations and whether their response(s) to EC
              consultations are in line with the bank’s own position and weighing of different interests.

              This lack of transparency and awareness raises questions about the level of representativeness and
              accountability – both by the industry associations lobbying at EU level claiming to represent their
              members, and the CEOs of the banks who take ultimate responsibility for lobbying positions devel-
              oped and acted on in their name.




50            A STRUCTURAL PROBLEM IN THE SHADOWS
Notes

1   If not mentioned specifically, all information is based on     16 http://www.hypo.org/Content/default.asp?PageID=407
    research and interviews with each of the six Dutch                 (viewed 19 August 2016).
    banks covered by this report, which are reflected in the       17 https://die-dk.de/en/about-us/ (viewed 19 August
    Annexes published on the SOMO website accompan-                    2016).
    ying the publication of the report.                            18 http://www.bis.org/publ/bcbs269/comments.htm
2   See p. 65 of this report: List of abbreviations of financial   19 http://www.bis.org/publ/bcbs269/duba.pdf.
    industry associations.                                         20 http://www.bis.org/publ/bcbs269/europeanbanking.pdf.
3   See Annexes to this report and each of the banks’              21 http://www.bis.org/publ/bcbs269/internationalba.pdf.
    submission to the EU Transparency Register, last viewed        22 http://www.bis.org/publ/bcbs269/iaocpm.pdf.
    on 7 October 2016: http://ec.europa.eu/transparencyre-         23 http://www.bis.org/publ/bcbs269/jtagcceiiisas.pdf
    gister/public/homePage.do?redir=false&locale=en.               24 All viewed on 19 August 2016.
4   GRI, G4 Sustainability reporting guidelines, 2013 and          25 http://ec.europa.eu/finance/securities/securitisation/
    updated August 2015, p.28: Principle G4-16.                        index_en.htm#maincontentSec2.
5   This became apparent in June and July 2016 during the
    interviews by SOMO of bank representatives in charge
    of lobbying and contact with financial legislators.
6   Compare the two webpages: https://www.ing.com/
    ING-in-Society/Sustainability/Stakeholder-engagement/
    Regulation-and-Supervision.htm and https://www.ing.
    com/ING-in-Society/Sustainability/Stakeholder-engage
    ment.htm (last viewed 26 September 2016): The former
    webpage does not link to the GRI table included in the
    2015 ING annual report nor correctly categorises all
    lobbying associations.
7   See for instance: https://www.bba.org.uk/policy/
    bba-consultation-responses/ (viewed 7 October 2016).
8   https://www.ing.com/ING-in-Society/Sustainability/Sta-
    keholder-engagement/Regulation-and-Supervision.htm.
9   Ministry of Finance, Response to questions for SOMO
    research regarding transparency and weighing of inte-
    rests related to financial legislative processes and
    lobbying by banks, email received by SOMO on 19 July
    2016: Response to question nr.10: The Ministry consi-
    ders associations to speak in the name of their mem-
    bers.
10 http://ec.europa.eu/finance/securities/securitisation/
    index_en.htm : Securitisation regulation was intended
    to apply to all securitisations and included issues such as
    due diligence, risk retention and transparency rules
    together with criteria for Simple, Transparent and Stan-
    dardised (STS) Securitisations.
11 http://ec.europa.eu/finance/consultations/2015/securi-
    tisation/index_en.htm.
12 Annex SNS Bank, box on STS Securitisation.
13 D. Tuijnman, Government Affairs Manager, ABN AMRO,
    email to SOMO, 17 August 2016.
14 https://www.dutchsecuritisation.nl/sites/default/files/
    documents/DSA%20responses%20to%20EC%20
    consultation%20on%20STS%20securitisatio%20(final).
    pdf (viewed 19 August 2016); http://www.afme.eu/en/
    divisions-and-committees/securitisation/ (viewed 19
    August 2016).
15 https://ec.europa.eu/eusurvey/publication/securitisati-
    on-2015?surveylanguage=en (viewed 5 May 2016).



                                                                                                                               51
                Chapter 5

                CONCLUSIONS
                WITH COMMENTARIES
unsatisfacto- In the Netherlands, the lessons learnt from the financial crisis about the way financial legislation
ry voIuntary was influenced through regulatory capture and lead to financial instability at the expense of the
measures      public interest, were not followed up with lasting and effective measures. Voluntary measures and
              initiatives, promised or put in place following the publication of the SOMO report in 2013, have
              not improved the situation. The interaction with, and lobbying of the Ministry of Finance, by Dutch
              banks (as it is for other sectors towards other ministries), remains unregulated.

inadequate      By researching the financial legislative process in the Netherlands and the influencing or lobbying
decision-       activities undertaken by six Dutch banks, this report exposes the inadequate transparency, acces-
making pro-     sibility, balance and accountability of the law-making process and the attendant risk of regulatory
cess            capture. Moreover, there has been little awareness about tackling the challenges of lobbying both
                by the banks and by the Dutch government. The Ministry of Finance has produced guidelines on
                dealing with external contacts but these were issued only at the end of August 2016.


                Transparency of the financial legislative process
the useful-  The purpose of incorporating transparency into the legislative process is to allow stakeholders and
ness of more the public to know not only when future laws are being deliberated but also whether decision-
transparency makers are receiving input from all stakeholders or being subject to excessive lobbying from par-
             ticular interest groups. Having access to such information makes it easier to hold the Minister of
             Finance and the responsible CEO’s of the banks publicly accountable for the choices he/she has
             made to propose respectively influence a new financial law.

                Lack of easy access to information prevents monitoring and critical views

information     Information on new financial legislation at national and EU level is not easily accessible to citizens
versus trans-   and civil society organisations. Technical and lengthy documents are available to view on various
parency         government and parliamentary websites but there is no simple or accessible overview available of
                upcoming financial laws and what issues may be at stake in such laws, including those that affect
                public interests and citizens.

                Lack of transparency compounds the difficulty for citizens wishing to acquire informed opinions,
                prepare and provide input, balance or argue against the financial lobby, and stimulate public de-
                bates for instance, all behaviours and activities which help prevent regulatory capture.

                Financial legislative processes at EU level are not transparent to the public

importance of EU financial laws play a determining role in national laws that regulate banks but it is hard for citi-
transparent   zens to know what and when decisions on future EU laws are made by the Minister of Finance who
EU decisions co-decides on such laws within the EU Council of Ministers of Finance (ECOFIN)). For instance,
              no consultations are organised by the Ministry of Finance on EU legislative proposals, which could
              alert citizens and civil society about ongoing financial reforms. As the case of STS securitisation
              shows, the Ministry is not transparent about decision-making at EU level and does not provide
              adequate information to the public. This prevents citizens and civil society organisations to make
              contributions to the EU decision-making process although it is crucial to regulation of the Dutch
              financial sector.



52              A STRUCTURAL PROBLEM IN THE SHADOWS
              Monitoring capacity by banks underreported

preparing      The large Dutch banks, in particular, are not transparent about their capacity to monitor upcoming
lobbying posi- legislation at national and EU level. Banks have this ability via their own staff and/or collectively
tions          through their (many) memberships of financial industry associations. Knowing about legislation in
               advance gives them time to assess any possible impacts of such legislation that harm their inter-
               ests, interact with colleagues inside and outside the bank, interact with ministry officials, prepare
               for official consultations, and develop lobby strategies. Citizens and civil society organisations are
               far from having the same capacity to monitor and prepare.

              Lobbying by banks hardly made public by the Ministry of Finance

missing       There is little to no public information made available by the Ministry of Finance on its interactions
information   with, and the lobbying activities by, the six banks researched for this report.
about
informal      Some details of banks’ positions are available when the Ministry publishes responses to its public
contact       internet consultations and when the final legislative proposals are sent to parliament. Although the
              Ministry of Finance is more transparent than other Dutch ministries regarding external contacts
              (i.e. the Minister’s diary and speeches are partly published, and social media (Twitter) is used to
              inform about his activities), the information on interactions which may influence legislation is not
              complete. For example, there is nothing public on meetings at the Ministry that have taken place
              with interested parties, sometimes at the request of the Ministry, nor what was discussed at such
              meetings with which persons. In the case of STS securitisation there was no public information –
              including that shared with parliament – about meetings held with different financial stakeholders
              which the Ministry revealed to SOMO for this report.

              Because of this lacuna, the importance of the issues being discussed between the Ministry and the
              banks, and/or the effects of lobbying cannot be assessed and made part of the discussions about
              accountability.

              Banks little transparent about their lobbying

lack of       Even less information is provided by the banks about their lobbying and contacts – direct or in-
published     direct via industry associations – with the Ministry. There is hardly any public information made
information   available by the banks themselves about their concrete lobby positions, including their responses
              to official consultations, though some general easy-to-understand viewpoints are published for
              instance by ING and Rabobank. Detailed responses to public consultations are made public by the
              banks on the website of the body which has issued the consultation but are difficult to find with-
              out knowing what consultations are taking place and which banks are members of which industry
              association, and which industry associations have responded. The smaller Dutch banks such as
              SNS bank and its subsidiary ASN Bank argue that they undertake little or no lobbying on legislative
              processes but, without transparency, it is not clear whether their voice is heard less at the Ministry
              than that of the large banks.

              Since the 2013 SOMO report, Taking Lobbying Public1, the banks have become less transparent,
              despite their expressions in 2013 of willingness to improve lobbying transparency. Guidance on
              transparency issued by the Global Reporting Initiative (GRI) also requires much less voluntary re-
              quirements to be transparent about lobbying positions and activities.

              Information about weighing of external inputs not complete

balancing     Though the Ministry of Finance states in the Memorie van Toelichting, an explanatory document
interests     that accompanies the final legislative proposals, how it has taken into account external inputs, it
              mainly refers to public consultation and not informal input. Without information on informal inputs,
              citizens and parliamentarians cannot see how the Ministry has weighed the value of all input, if




                                                                                                                   53
                 the public interest has been sufficiently taken into account and/or whether regulatory capture has
                 taken place.

                 Remedies for better transparency not adequate

the challeng- Overall, there is still a serious lack of transparency both by the Ministry and the banks that lob-
es of lobbying by, but no binding obligations to remedy that deficiency. The Ministry of Finance new guidelines
not addressed on external contacts will not fully address the problems. The voluntary measures and reporting
               standards for banks have even been weakened. Although there is some preparedness to improve
               transparency about lobbying on both sides, there is too little comprehensive acknowledgment of
               the constitutional right to have access to information in order to have a balanced and integer de-
               cision-making process with regard to financial legislation, and help avoid compromise of the public
               interest.



                 Limited access to the legislative process undermines citi-
                 zens’ right to be heard
                 Limited access via public consultations

consultations    Public official website consultations on future financial laws issued by the Ministry of Finance have
too little       not been announced in a very visible way and have received little response from citizens and civil
visible and      society when compared to that from the financial sector. Not all proposals on domestic financial
accessible       legislation have been subject to public consultations though this should change from September
                 2016. Until then, consultations have been on already elaborated, and complex, draft proposals giv-
                 ing little leeway to fundamentally question the proposal (e.g. whether STS securitisation will spread
                 too many risks while not achieving the stated aims of financing SMEs). The Ministry has especially
                 been seeking to make laws more effective.

                 Other channels for citizens and civil society to give input to proposed legislation are available but
                 there is no guarantee that views expressed in this way will be taken into account. This limited way
                 for citizens prevents sufficient stakeholders providing official inputs throughout the decision-mak-
                 ing process in the same way as large banks have the capacity to do.

                 No official national consultation on EU laws

influencing    There are no official national public internet consultations issued by the Ministry of Finance on
EU legislation upcoming EU financial laws despite the crucial impact such legislation has on the national financial
               regulatory framework. The Ministry does not make public when consultations for such proposals
               take place at EU level though this is responded to extensively by the industry associations to which
               Dutch banks belong. This makes it even more difficult for citizens to directly influence and be heard
               by the Ministry on the Dutch position in the ECOFIN.


                 Privileged access by the financial sector
                 Many channels of input

all levels in-   Due to their expertise and lobbying capacity, directly and through industry associations, banks
volved           have been able to provide inputs to the Ministry, sometimes at the request of the latter, through
                 many channels such as meetings, emails, phone calls and events. These contacts take place for
                 different purposes (from information exchange to lobbying) at all levels of decision-making in the
                 Ministry and the banks, from the bank expert who meets the civil servant, to the CEO calling the
                 Minister (or vice versa).

                 This closed network, with experts often having regular contact with one another, is difficult to ac-


54               A STRUCTURAL PROBLEM IN THE SHADOWS
diversity and    cess, and may not represent the diversity of stakeholders. The overall government code of conduct
integrity at     for integrity (Gedragscode Integriteit Rijk (2015)) which applies to all civil servants, contains no spe-
stake            cific guidelines on dealing with lobbyists. This decision-making process has resulted in the Ministry
                 receiving imbalanced inputs and the banking sector having privileged access to the Ministry. The
                 Ministry’s new guidelines for external contacts (Gedragslijn externe contacten) proposed no concrete
                 procedures to address this imbalance but provided more concrete processes to deal with lobbyists.

                 The DBA/NVB: A strong coordinating body

unequal          The DBA/NVB is the preferred point of contact for the Ministry of Finance when dealing with
capacity         banks. Because it is an umbrella organisation, it very often presents a compromise of the views of
                 its members. It plays an important role in preparing and coordinating the lobbying positions of its
                 members in the Netherlands and uses its significant human and financial resources (ca. 55 staff,
                 estimated € 14m budget) to lobby and liaise with the Ministry of Finance, as well as other govern-
                 ment ministries, authorities and organisations. Citizens, civil society organisations and even other
                 industry sectors such as SMEs are not able to organise themselves in a similar fashion. Moreover,
                 small banks such as Triodos Bank and SNS Bank have too little means to actively engage in industry
                 associations. ASN Bank has no wish to involve itself in a top-down approach to upcoming legisla-
                 tion and so its views on sustainability issues are seldom heard in those discussions.

                 The ability of the DBA/NVB to coordinate and engage in lobbying the views of its members to-
                 wards the Ministry could arguably give the Ministry of Finance a one-sided view of the issues.

                 Poor management of lobbying by the banks

no overview      The three largest banks are organised and resourced to lobby both individually and collectively,
and assess-      channelling their expertise and political power. None, however, have an overview of all the lob-
ment             bying and interactions conducted by all members of staff or management board, nor the industry
                 associations to which they belong. Consequently, no-one (including the Ministry, the public, the
                 banks themselves) can fully assess the impact of their lobbying activities and consequently take
                 measures to redress imbalanced and privileged access to the Ministry, and reduce the risks of ex-
                 cessive and undue lobbying or regulatory capture.



                 The public interest at stake during weighing of interests
                 Lack of clarity

diversity ver-   Notwithstanding the ability of the major banks to monitor, interact and lobby the Ministry of Fi-
sus exposure     nance, they nonetheless believe that the Ministry does not always decide in their favour and takes
                 other economic and political considerations into account. The Ministry is interested to weigh differ-
                 ent aspects in order to have effective and politically endorsed laws, and endeavour to have an in-
                 dependent and balanced view. Even so, explanations by the Ministry in the Memorie van Toelichting
                 show how its weighing of different interests, and its assessment of potential impacts of proposed
                 legislation on citizens, are not well developed or defined.

                 Given that the Ministry is much more exposed to the positions put forward by banks at national
                 and EU level – compared to the views of citizens, civil society organisations and academics – there
                 is no guarantee the Ministry can fully understand public, societal and citizens interests, let alone
                 prioritise them.

                 Lobbying not subject to bank CSR policy

                 The large Dutch banks argue that their lobbying positions take into account sustainability issues,
                 clients, the interests of different stakeholders, and the economy. Still, they do not consider lob-



                                                                                                                       55
impact on    bying to be part of their corporate social responsibility (CSR) policy notwithstanding its impact on
society un-  regulation and the banks’ functioning in society. The large banks’ overall strategies and positions
derestimated remain driven by competitiveness and profitability, which they might even argue to be in their cli-
             ent’s interests. In contrast, for Triodos Bank, ASN Bank and increasingly SNS Bank, sustainability
             is central to their business and any lobbying they undertake is to promote sustainability or protect
             their sustainable banking operations. ASN Bank’s investment policy prohibits investments in com-
             panies that lobby against its values, such as denial of climate change.

comprehen- None of the Dutch banks has a comprehensive policy on lobbying which cover aspects such as
sive approach transparency, expenses, behaviour, membership of industry associations, positions taken directly
missing       and indirectly, accountability, revolving doors, payments, protecting public interest etc. In practice,
              some measures and principles are applied, such as subscribing to voluntary codes of conduct as
              well as adhering to the bank’s behavioural codes. How effective these measures are to protect the
              public interest against undue lobbying, is not clear.


               Accountability not fully practiced or developed
               Accountability of the Minister of Finance

missing infor- The Minister of Finance, Mr Dijsselbloem, has claimed over recent years that he is responsible and
mation         accountable for all decisions taken regarding national financial legislative proposals. If this is the
               case, he should also be accountable for allowing any imbalances in the influence from the Minis-
               try’s external contacts. It is hard, however, to hold him accountable on this when not all informa-
               tion on external inputs and lobbying is available. This is demonstrated in the so-called ‘coco-gate’
               case, where banks were allowed to incorporate their wording in the draft law though this was nei-
               ther explained to parliamentarians nor discussed by them around the time of voting.

               There is also little public accountability on co-decisions the Minister makes at the European Coun-
               cil of Finance Ministers (ECOFIN), even though he presents his views to parliament.

               Accountability of bank CEOs

unaware of     The final responsibility and accountability for lobbying positions taken by banks lies with the chair
all lobbying   of the management board, also referred to as the CEO, though the decisions may actually be taken
               at lower management or expert level. This does not apply to the CEO of Triodos bank who takes
               positions in the DBA/NVB which represent those of the smaller banks, not his own bank.

               Given the lack of overview of the bank’s lobbying activities and positions, it is highly possible that
               CEOs are in principle accountable for positions and activities conducted on behalf of the bank of
               which they are unaware. Except for the DBA/NVB where the CEOs of the main banks in the Neth-
               erlands take final lobbying positions, CEOs might also be very well unaware of all activities con-
               ducted and positions taken by some of the industry associations of which the bank is a member.
               This means that in case of excessive or undue lobbying, or corporate capture, those responsible are
               not aware of any problems and, therefore, may not take action to redress them.


               Overall assessment
risks of public Based on its findings, this report’s overall conclusion is that there is a risk of regulatory capture of
interest being financial legislative processes in the Netherlands that is hardly visible and that is subject to little
left unattend- awareness. This results in indirect influence and difficult to measure impacts of the banks’ lobbying
ed              and their interaction with the Ministry of Finance. There are too little measures in place to monitor
                transparency, accessibility, balanced access and weighing of diverse interests, and accountability so
                as to protect citizens and the public interest and to address cases of unbalanced lobbying and un-
                due influence from the Dutch banking sector.



56             A STRUCTURAL PROBLEM IN THE SHADOWS
Chapter 6

RECOMMENDATIONS TO
INCREASE TRANSPARENCY
AND ACCOUNTABILITY OF
LOBBYING
Based on the findings of this report, the following recommendations aim to address the risks and
practices of too little transparency about interaction and lobbying undertaken by banks at the
Ministry of Finance during the legislative decision making process. They also address the current
conditions that favour large banks and the industry associations that represent them, while citizens
and civil society have only limited access to the means of protecting their interests. Because volun-
tary measures failed to uphold and improve standards that should prevent regulatory capture, bold
steps are now required if progress is to be made.

The recommendations attempt to address particular challenges posed by the context in the Nether-
lands in which the current government’s search to find a compromise among different stakeholders
increasingly results in promoting the business sector, including the financial sector, to ensure the
Netherlands remains economically competitive in a globalised, open European and world economy.

In addition, the complexity of current banking operations and financial legislation – much of which
takes place at EU level – means that involving citizens and civil society and diverse stakeholders
during the legislative process will require additional efforts to the attempts and proposals made so
far.

The recommendations in this report are made in the context of:
• Existing parliamentary proposals calling for increased transparency and greater openness to
  diverse interests during policy-making and legislative decision-making, issued by the Initiatiefno-
  ta Lobby in daglicht: luisteren en laten zien (December 2015, by MPs Bouwmeester and Oosen-
  brug).1 The banks interviewed for this report are in favour of this initiative.
• A parliamentary motion to create a ‘legislative footprint’ for all legislative proposals (March
  2016, by MPs Van Gerven en Oosenbrug).2
• New ‘guidelines on external contacts’ issued by the Ministry of Finance (29 August 2016).3
• New European Commission proposals to increase the stringency of its EU Transparency Register
  (28 September 20164) and the transparency of lobbying.

The above initiatives and proposals indicate that decision-makers recognise somewhat the level of
concern and mistrust among citizens at the influence exerted by the financial sector, and business
in general, and the threat to the public interest from undue or excessive lobbying and regulatory
capture. The following recommendations aim to contribute to discussions on ways of maintaining
the integrity of democratic legislative processes and the role of the financial sector.




                                                                                                  57
     Recommendations to the government
     Legally binding regulations

     In order to ensure equity among different stakeholders and citizens who want to influence the
     legislative processes and in order to constantly uphold the standards, legally binding regulations
     should be introduced by national law. Any new binding regulations should themselves be the sub-
     ject of a transparent and balanced consultation process, and should include:
     • the creation of a mandatory Transparency Register with a code of conduct,
     • the implementation of a comprehensive legislative footprint (lobby paragraaf),
     • the establishing of guidelines for all civil servants and ministers on dealing with lobbyists,
     • transparency about Ministers’ official diary,
     • guidance for improving the balanced weighing of different interest with special attention to the
        public interest and the interests of citizens.

     Such legislation should strive to at least equal the rules applied by the European Commission and
     requirements included in the EU Transparency register.5 There is also much to learn from the expe-
     riences of other countries such as Austria and France, and especially Canada6 where institutional
     enforcement through a Commissioner for lobbying has been accompanied by special efforts to
     encourage more citizen involvement in the legislative process and better weighing of stakeholder
     interests.

     The following recommendations spell out the above proposals in more detail.

     Be transparent in order to protect the right to know, by:

     • Introducing a mandatory and comprehensive ‘legislative footprint’ that:
       - is included in the Memorie van Toelichting (explanatory note) which accompanies the official
     		 internet consultation and clarifies the external inputs that have been received before the
     		 period of official consultation;
       - is comprehensive when sent by the Ministry to Parliament with the policy papers and final
     		 legislative proposals and includes information about all formal and informal inputs, i.e. not
     		 restricted to mentioning the responses to the consultation;
       - explains how the Ministry has taken into account (or not) all the formal and informal interac-
     		 tion and inputs it received, and how the range of interests were balanced, including the inter-
     		 ests of those who were underrepresented in the consultation process;
       - is based on renewed guidelines for legislation (aanwijzingen) that ensure the fullest possible
     		 transparency without compromising access to the process for whistle-blowers.

     • Making public announcements about legislation as it is being developed
       A number of methods are available for publicising upcoming legislation, such as a dedicated
       webpage on the website of the Ministry developing the legislative proposals. Any announce-
       ments of forthcoming legislation should include a short summary about the aim of the proposed
       legislation and information updated monthly on the external inputs received, including before,
       during and after the website consultation. By making such information public – along with all
       links to submissions made to the internet consultation from industry associations, companies,
       organisations etc. – the ‘legislative footprint’ would be transparent from the very beginning (‘liv-
       ing legislative footprint’).

     • Openness about the diaries (‘agenda’) of decision-makers
       Transparency of interaction with external contacts and lobbyists by Ministers, Deputy Ministers,
       Director-Generals and senior officials who are responsible for particular areas of policy or regula-
       tion, can be increased by:
       - Publishing diaries that announce as many meetings/events as possible a week ahead.




58   A STRUCTURAL PROBLEM IN THE SHADOWS
  - Maintaining a detailed archive on the website of the professional meetings/events undertaken
		 with external parties, and publishing in very short (as is the case at the European Commis-
		 sion):
		· the date of the meeting;
		· the organisation/company represented at the meeting and/or the individuals who attended;
		· the subjects covered at the meeting and any documents received in connection with the dis-
			 cussion before, during and after the meeting;
		· where the meeting took place;
		· links to speeches made by the Minister at events;
		· ensuring all speeches made by Ministers, Deputy Ministers and Director-Generals are avail-
			 able on the Ministry’s website;
		· using social media to inform the public about the Minister’s activities and press conferences
			 (cf. tweets made by the Minister of Finance).

Protect the right to be heard

It can be made easier for citizens, civil society organisations and other diverse groups who work in
the public interest to provide input to the legislative process through:

• Improving public internet consultations on EU and national legislative proposals, by:
  - Including questions that are accessible and comprehensible to citizens and non-profit organi-
		 sations, and can be easily answered;
  - Asking questions related to the aim and desired effect of the legislation, and not only focusing
		 on the technicalities;
  - Ensuring widespread and targeted publicity of consultations which reach diverse potential
		 interest groups. Resources will need to be allocated for this.

• Making input easier for citizens outside the internet consultations, by:
  - Ensuring information is easier to find by citizens about upcoming legislation;
  - Being more accessible for citizens to ask questions pertaining to upcoming legislation;
  - Providing more interactive channels for citizens to give input;
  - Dedicating more staff, e.g. a Ministry spokesperson, to relations with non-financial stakehold-
		 ers and citizens.

Protect the integrity of the democratic legislative decision-making process

Undue and excessive lobbying can be prevented by:

• Introducing a comprehensive mandatory Transparency Register to be used jointly by ministries
  and parliament, in line with the EU Transparency Register, as follows:
  - Companies and organisations that regularly interact and lobby government or parliament
     would be obliged to subscribe to the Transparency Register. Such companies and organisa-
     tions that do not subscribe would be unable to lobby officials, though waivers would exist for
     occasional visits and citizens.
  - Those who subscribe to the Transparency Register would automatically subscribe to a code of
     conduct, as defined by the government and based on consultations with stakeholders.
  - The Transparency Register would include details of all in-house and external lobbyists used by
     companies and organisations, the (voluntary) lobby codes that cover the behaviour of
     these lobbyists, information about persons who have a parliamentary pass, the issues that
     particular lobbyists/organisations are likely to focus on, the estimated costs of each compa-
     ny’s/organisation’s lobbying activities (staff, housing, travel, office costs, membership fees of
     organisations that lobby on their behalf), details of the individual or individuals with legal/
     management responsibility for lobbying positions within a company or organisation.
  - Companies and organisations should update their details annually and include a short over-
     view of lobbying activities undertaken at Dutch level during the previous year.




                                                                                                   59
       - The introduction of a Transparency Register should not obstruct the easy access by citizens
         and small organisations or companies to policy makers in parliament and ministries.
       - The implementation of the Register should be monitored by an independent and well-
         resourced authority, inspired by the practice in Canada.

     • Adapting the code of conduct for integrity (Gedragscode Integriteit Rijk (2015)) which applies to
       all civil servants, by adding new guidelines on dealing with lobbyists (e.g. as included in the re-
       cent Ministry of Finance Gedragslijn Externe contacten), such as:
       - Clear standards and procedures regarding communications between public officials and
           interest groups, how meetings are agreed upon and organised with clarity about the topics to
           be discussed.
       - The establishment of a registration mechanism for meetings conducted with lobbyists. This
           record can be used for the legislative footprint.
       - Having a definition of lobbying that makes clear to civil servants in what different ways undue
           influence can be exerted.
       - Guidance on how to guarantee diversity among stakeholders and experts, including those
           from civil society, and how to organise invitations for stakeholder meetings.

     Ensure that the public interest is weighed fairly against all other interests and information,
     by:

     • Putting more efforts into identifying the diverse stakeholders affected by each legislative pro-
       posal and improving assessment of the impact of such proposals on citizens and non-profit inter-
       ests. This can be developed and described in the guidelines for the Memorie van Toelichting.
     • Clarifying the benefits and risks of legislation to the public interest.
     • Ensuring that there are sufficient human resources to process diverse inputs and all responses
       to official consultations so that such responses do not delay or undermine legislation (as in the
       US where numerous and lengthy responses are used by the financial industry to delay legisla-
       tion).
     • Establishing clear and practical guidelines on balancing inputs from different stakeholders in
       order, for example, to avoid a situation where the interest group with most responses to consul-
       tations has a dominating influence.
     • Ensuring the Memorie van Toelichting sent to the parliament explains how all formal and informal
       inputs have been assessed, and how any underrepresented interests were considered.
     • Asking questions, by civil servants and policy makers who meet representatives or lobbyists of
       an industry association and deal with consultation responses, which members of the association
       are supporting the presented position, the lobby paper or consultation response. This would
       avoid the industry association being captured by a small group of members.

     Exercise more accountability about lobbying activities

     An improved Memorie van Toelichting and especially its comprehensive legislative footprint, a new
     mandatory transparency register, enhanced openness to citizens, an up to date BNC-fiche and
     improved weighing of interests by decision-makers, should provide reasonable information for de-
     bates in parliament, the media and amongst different stakeholders and citizens about the choices
     made by a Ministry and its responsible Minister when presenting a final legislative proposals to
     parliament.

     Accountability discussions should clarify how the public interest has been taken into account if at
     all, who is impacted in what way and whether the weighing of diverse interests has resulted in an
     outcome that unduly benefits a particular stakeholder. The outcome should be more integer deci-
     sion-making at the parliament, which is trusted by citizens.




60   A STRUCTURAL PROBLEM IN THE SHADOWS
Recommendations to the Ministry of Finance
The Minister of Finance, Mr Dijsselbloem, has taken specific additional action to increase transpar-
ency of his Ministry regarding external contacts, for example by publishing part of his diary. As a
result, the Ministry of Finance has shown that all ministries in the government can be more open.
Given, however, the complex nature of financial legislation and the resources available to the bank-
ing sector, there are still further specific improvements in addition to those listed above, which the
Ministry of Finance can make to its decision-making.

A comprehensive transparency policy

The Ministry’s own transparency policy can be enhanced by:

• Publishing a comprehensive version of the Minister of Finance’s diary, as happens at the Euro-
  pean Commission, which would include information about:
  - the Minister’s meetings with external parties inside as well as outside the Ministry,
  - topics discussed at meetings (e.g. a specific EU or national legislative proposal),
  - attendees at agreed meetings (not during events or large meetings).

• Improving information about upcoming EU financial legislation (legislative proposals and
  reviews, white papers, etc.), namely:
  - A list of all current EU legislative processes which involve the Minister in EU co-decision
     making should be published on a webpage of the website of the Ministry of Finance, and
     not only as part of the government’s website. Each EU financial legislative proposal on the list
     should have a link to the BNC-fiche as well as EC websites including those about EC consulta-
     tions, the European Parliament, and the Council of Ministers of Finance where information
     about the ongoing process can also be found.
  - The BNC-fiche should start with a short easy to understand summary for non-experts.
  - The BNC-fiche should be regularly updated in line with any changes in the Minister’s position
     or compromises reached in the EU Council of the Ministers of Finance.
  - Public official internet consultations should be organised in due time by the Ministry about
     EU financial legislative proposals and the position held by the Minister of Finance on such
     proposals.

Better access for citizens, civil society organisations and diverse stakeholders to give input to the
legislative processes, by:

• Improving access to official public internet consultations:
  - Announce public consultations on the home page of the Ministry.
  - Use a range of means to attract responses from academics, stakeholders and citizens.
  - Include in the Memorie van Toelichting details of external contacts made by the Ministry prior
    to the website consultation.

• Increasing in house capacity and adding human resources:
   In order to identify and attract different non-financial interests and their representatives into the
   decision-making process to advise on particular upcoming legislation, more human resources
   and networking by the Ministry’s civil servants will be needed. This would implement the Minis-
   try’s new guidelines on external contacts which require more attention and a broad perspective
   (opletpunt, brede blik) from the heads of departments of the Ministry.

Ensure all interests are weighed seriously

Given the dominance of experts, inputs, interaction and lobbying by the banks, along with the con-
tinued complexity of the issues, specific efforts need to be made to weigh different interests when
deciding on a banking legislative proposal, by:




                                                                                                     61
     • Analysing the balance of the interests and powers (krachtenveldanalyse) that are represented in
       responses to consultations, at expert and consultation meetings, in meetings with the Minister,
       and other external inputs. When imbalances of represented interests are identified, pro-active
       search and research for missing stakeholder views and public interest positions have to be un-
       dertaken.

     • Developing and improving the impact and risks analysis of potential financial legislation on
       social, environmental, citizens’ and public interests. This should also be included in renewed
       guidelines for the Memorie van Toelichting.


     Recommendations to the banks
     The banks’ internal and external transparency about direct and indirect lobbying activities and
     positions has shown to be deficient to raise awareness about their impact and to allow scrutiny
     by policy makers and citizens. There are different ways by which banks can be more open and ac-
     countable.

     Public information is to be improved and enhanced about lobbying activities undertaken and the
     positions held by the bank on financial legislative proposals, by:

     • Informing more fully the public about lobbying activities and interaction with legislators and
       decision-makers
       Information about lobbying should be available on the website and, at the very least, in the
       bank’s annual report, as well as potentially in a Dutch transparency register as proposed above,
       by:
       - Giving details of all the legislative proposals on which the bank has been active, either directly
          or indirectly via industry associations.
       - Giving details of the bank’s lobbying activities on the bank’s website under easy-to-
          understand headings (not maatschappelijk gesprekken (social conversations) as SNS Bank does,
          or ‘principles’ as Rabobank has been doing7) with an easy-to-read short overview (position
          taken, which legislators approached, main lobbying activities, etc.).
       - Defining what the bank means by the term ‘lobbying’.

     • Publishing all lobby papers and consultation responses:
       - Make this information easy to find on the website, as did the DBA/NVB.8
       - List the significant issues covered in submissions made to consultations with a link to a short
         summary (e.g. a ‘viewpoint’ by ING, or ‘position paper’ by Rabobank) along with all related
         submissions and position papers, preferably with details of relevant lobbying activities.9

     • Listing all memberships of industry associations, by:
       - Publishing all memberships of financial industry associations in the annual report, even if
          such membership is not active, and refer in the GRI index on the annual reports under guide-
          line G4-16 to the exact webpage such memberships are listed.
       - Submitting a complete list of memberships to the EU Transparency Register and any future
          Dutch transparency register.
       - Ensuring an overview of memberships is available to all bank staff and provide the manage-
          ment board with information on the lobbying position of each industry association to which
          the bank belongs.
       - Publishing information about the bank’s level of engagement with these associations (board
          member, working groups, committees, etc.).

     • Improving transparency on the lobbying budget, by calculating the following information for
       inclusion in own publications (annual report, website, accounts) and transparency registers:
       - personnel budget and operating costs for the unit or department that lobbies, and/or devel-
          ops and presents the bank’s position on legislation, including lobbying by external lobbyists,



62   A STRUCTURAL PROBLEM IN THE SHADOWS
    - costs of membership of all financial industry organisations that represent or lobby on behalf of
      banks (regardless of whether the bank is actively involved in such activity),
    - cost of membership of lobby industry associations (often referred to as public affairs associa-
      tions) to which in-house lobbyists belong as members,
    - estimated costs of activities conducted by bank representations – from experts to members
      of the management board – in relation to contact with legislative authorities.

Ensure integrity of the bank’s interactions with, and lobbying of, legislative authorities, by:

• Developing a code of conduct for those involved in lobbying, expertise sharing and representa-
  tion, which could be incorporated into the current Dutch bankers’ oath.10 Otherwise, ensure that
  all are subject to (voluntary but preferably mandatory or statutory) codes of conduct.
• Making lobbying a corporate responsibility issue to reflect the impact such activity has on so-
  ciety. All lobbying activity would then need to be in line with the bank’s sustainability statements
  and goals, or an explanation required when that is not the case.11
• Ensuring that the industry associations to which the banks belong, have strong codes of conduct
  for those who lobby on their behalf.
• Disclosing the names of the lobbyists who represent the bank at public institutions.

Develop a comprehensive policy on interaction and lobbying on legislative proposals

The awareness, responsibility and accountability by each bank for its interactions, lobbying activi-
ties and positons could be increased by adopting a comprehensive policy with guidelines for each
bank, or collectively by all Dutch banks, that cover amongst others:
   • transparency (of lobbying position, lobbying activities, costs, memberships, etc.),
   • integrity (which codes of conduct are being followed, for example),
   • CSR (no contradiction to sustainability objectives, no harm to society and the public interest),
   • coordination and supervision of all lobbying positions,
   • defining who is finally responsible and therefore accountable for lobbying positions and activi-
      ties, and if appropriate, for (redressing) excessive or undue behaviour,
   • the level of engagement in and responsibility for positions and lobbying activities of financial
      industry associations, to avoid abuses of representation and excessive lobbying.




Notes
1   Tweede Kamer, Initiatiefnota van de leden Bouwmeester        6   See: Office of the Commissioner of Lobbying of Canada,
    en Oosenbrug: “Lobby in dagicht: luisteren en laten zien”,       https://lobbycanada.gc.ca/eic/site/012.nsf/
    Kamerstuk 34 376, blg-650569, 24 December 2015.                  eng/h_00000.html.
2   Tweede Kamer, Gewijzigde motie van de leden Van              7   https://www.rabobank.com/en/about-rabobank/in-soci-
    Gerven en Oosenbrug (t.v.v. 32637, nr. 229) over toe-            ety/principles/index.html (last viewed 7 October 2016).
    voegen van een lobbyparagraaf, Kamerstuk 32 637, nr.         8   https://www.nvb.nl/publicaties-standpunten/100/publi-
    232, 1 March 2016.                                               caties.html.
3   Ministry of Finance, Gedragslijn Externe contacten, 29       9   See also existing voluntary requirements: GRI, G4 Sus-
    August 2016.                                                     tainability Reporting Guidelines – Implementation Ma-
4   European Commission, Proposal for a Interinstitutio-             nual, August 2015, p. 209: ‘Describe the significant
    nal Agreement on a mandatory Transparency Register,              issues that are the focus of the organization’s participati-
    28 September 2016, http://ec.europa.eu/transparency/             on in public policy development and lobbying. This refers
    regdoc/rep/1/2016/EN/1-2016-627-EN-F1-1.PDF                      to participation at the level of the entire organization,
    (viewed 29 September 2016).                                      rather than individual operations. Provide the organiza-
5   See: http://ec.europa.eu/transparencyregister/public/            tion’s core position for each of the identified issues, and
    consultation/search.do?reset=&locale=en#en.                      describe any significant differences between lobbying
                                                                     positions and stated policies, sustainability goals, or
                                                                     other public positions.’



                                                                                                                                 63
     10 Transparency International - Nederland, Lifting the
         lid on lobbying – Enhancing the trust in public decisi-
         on-making in the Netherlands, 2015, p. 41, note 194:
         ‘note that this self-regulating banker’s oath is based on
         the statutory stemming from the Wijzigingwet financiële
         markten 2013,the Wijzigingwet financiële markten 2015
         and the Regeling eed of belofte financiële sector’.
     11 See GRI, G4 Sustainability Reporting Guidelines –
         Implementation Manual, August 2015, p. 209: ‘Provide
         the organization’s core position for each of the identified
         issues, and describe any significant differences between
         lobbying positions and stated policies, sustainability
         goals, or other public positions.’




64   A STRUCTURAL PROBLEM IN THE SHADOWS
Abreviations of financial industry associations
ABA                                                       DGZ
Austrian Banking Association (Bankenverband) |            De Groene Zaak | http://degroenezaak.com/
https://www.bankenverband.at/ | ABA is a member of
EBF                                                       DSA
                                                          Dutch Securitization Association | https://www.dutch-
ABB                                                       securitisation.nl/ DSA is an observer member of PCS
Association of Banks in Bulgaria | http://abanksb.bg/
                                                          DUFAS
AFME                                                      Dutch Fund and Asset Management Association |
Association for Financial Markets in Europe | http://     http://www.dufas.nl/ | DUFAS is a member of EFAMA
www.afme.eu/ AFME is a member of ECMI, GFMA and           and VNO-NCW / CNIE
an observer member of PCS
                                                          EACB
AGB                                                       The European Association of Co-operative Banks |
Association of German Banks (Bankenverband) | http://     http://www.eacb.coop/
en.bankenverband.de/ | AGB is a member of EBF and
EPC                                                       EBA
                                                          Euro Banking Association | https://www.abe-eba.eu/
AmCham
American Chamber of Commerce in the Netherlands |         EBF
http://www.amcham.nl/                                     European Banking Federation | http://www.ebf-fbe.eu/
                                                          | the EBF is a member of IbFed, EPC and ECMI
BBA
British Banking Association | https://www.bba.org.uk/ |   ECBC
BBA is a member of EBF                                    European Covered Bonds Council | http://ecbc.hypo.
                                                          org/
BEAMA
Belgian Asset Managers Association | http://www.bea-      ECMI
ma.be/ | BEAMA is a member of EFAMA                       European Capital Markets Institute | http://www.euro-
                                                          capitalmarkets.org ECMI is hosted by CEPS
BPFI
Banking and Payments Federation Ireland | http://         EFAMA
www.bpfi.ie/ | BPFI is a member of EBF and the EPC        European Financial Assets Management Association |
                                                          http://www.efama.org/ EFAMA is a member of ECMI,
Bruegel                                                   and observer member of PCS
European think tank in economics | http://bruegel.org/
                                                          EFR
CBA                                                       The European Financial Services Round Table | http://
Czech Banking Association (Ceska Bankovni Asociace)       www.efr.be/ EFR is an observer member of PCS
| https://www.czech-ba.cz/ | CBA is a member of EBF
and EPC                                                   EMF
                                                          European Mortgage Federation | http://www.hypo.org/
CEPS
Centre for European Policy Studies| https://www.ceps.     EPC
eu/                                                       European Payments Council | http://www.european-
                                                          paymentscouncil.eu/
DACB
Dutch Association of Covered Bonds Issuers | https://     EPFS
www.dacb.nl/ | DACB is a member of ECBC                   The European Parliamentary Financial Services Forum |
                                                          http://www.epfsf.org/
DBA /NVB
Dutch Banking Association (Nederlandse Vereniging         ERFF
van Banken (NVB)) | https://www.nvb.nl/ | DBA is a        European Retail Financial Forum | http://www.erff.eu/
member of EBF, ECBC and EPFSF

                                                                                                               65
ESBG/ WSBI                                                 LBA
European Savings and Retail Banking Group / World          Luxembourg Bankers’ Association (Luxemburger Bank-
Savings and Retail Banking Institute | http://www.sav-     envereinigung) | http://www.abbl.lu/ | LBA is a member
ings-banks.com/ ESBG is a member of EPC                    of EBF, ECBC and EPC

EUROFI                                                     LMA
http://www.eurofi.net/                                     Loan Market Association | http://www.lma.eu.com/

EVPA                                                       PBA
European Venture Philanthropy Association| http://         Polish Banking Association (Związku Banków Polskich)
evpa.eu.com/                                               | https://zbp.pl/ | PBA is a member of EBF

FBF                                                        PCS
French Banking Association (Fédération Bancaire            Prime Collateralized Securities | http://pcsmarket.org/
Française) | http://www.fbf.fr/ | FBF is a member of       PCS is member of ECMI
EBF and EPC
                                                           RBA
Febelfin                                                   Romanian Banking Association (Asociatia Romana a
Belgian Financial Sector Federation (Belgische Feder-      Bancilor) | http://www.arb.ro/ | RBA is a member of
atie van de Financiële Sector) | https://www.febelfin.     EBF and EPC
be/ | FebelFin is a member of EBF and EPC
                                                           SBA
GFMA                                                       Spanish Banking Association (Asociación Española de
Global Financial Markets Association| http://www.          Banca) | https://www.aebanca.es/ | SBA is a member
gfma.org/                                                  of EBF and EPC

IACPM                                                      SFIG
International Association of Credit Portfolio Managers |   Structured Finance Industry Group | http://www.sfind-
http://web.iacpm.org/                                      ustry.org/

IBA                                                        SIF
Italian Banking Association (Associazione bancaria ital-   Social Investment Forum | http://www.socialinvest-
iana) | https://www.abi.it/ | IBA is a member of EBF and   mentforum.org.uk/
EPC
                                                           SvBA
IbFed                                                      Slovakian Banking Association (Sloveská Banková As-
International Banking Federation | http://www.ibfed.       sociácia) | http://www.sbaonline.sk/ | SvBA is a mem-
org/                                                       ber of EBF and EPC

ICA                                                        TheCityUK
International Cooperative Alliance | https://ica.coop/     https://www.thecityuk.com/

ICMA                                                       VNO-NCW / CNIE
International Capital Markets Association | http://www.    Verbond van Nederlandse Ondernemingen en het Ned-
icmagroup.org/ ICMA is a member of ECMI                    erlands Christelijk Werkgeversverbond (VNO-NCW) /
                                                           The Confederation of Netherlands Industry and Em-
IIF                                                        ployers https://www.vno-ncw.nl/ VNO-NCW / CNIE is
Institute of International Finance | https://www.iif.      member of CEPS
com/

ISDA
International Swaps and Derivatives Association |
http://www2.isda.org/ ISDA is a member of ECMI




66            A STRUCTURAL PROBLEM IN THE SHADOWS
67
     This report focuses on financial legislative processes in the Netherlands and whether measures
     have been or should be - taken to improve the transparency and accountability of the lobbying
     processes by Dutch banks. The aim is to prevent regulatory capture that is a major cause of finan-
     cial crises, and guarantee that financial law making is democratic, open, balanced and in the public
     interest.

     • Chapter one examines how transparent the Ministry of Finance is to citizens wishing to know
       about, and influence, upcoming financial legislation.
     • Chapter two provides an insight into the interaction between the Ministry and six Dutch banks
       regarding financial legislative proposals, and related lobbying by the banks.
     • Chapter three explains how the banks operationalise their lobbying activities.
     • Chapter four highlights how multiple memberships of industry associations is not well managed
       by the banks.

     The report concludes with commentaries on existing shortcomings and risks, and recommendations
     to concretely redress imbalances and lack of awareness about the impact of lobbying by banks.


68   A STRUCTURAL PROBLEM IN THE SHADOWS
