788049
research-article2018
                       APRXXX10.1177/1532673X18788049American Politics ResearchStrickland




                                                Research Article
                                                                                                                         American Politics Research
                                                                                                                                               ﻿1­–28
                                                A Paradox of Political                                                        © The Author(s) 2018
                                                                                                                           Reprints and permissions:
                                                Reform: Shadow                                              sagepub.com/journalsPermissions.nav
                                                                                                               DOI:    10.1177/1532673X18788049
                                                                                                            https://doi.org/10.1177/1532673X18788049
                                                Interests in the U.S.                                               journals.sagepub.com/home/apr

                                                States


                                                James Strickland1



                                                Abstract
                                                Laws that restrict and disclose the actions of lobbyists are attempts to
                                                protect elected officials from undue influence and preserve public trust
                                                in lawmaking processes. Imposing too many campaign finance restrictions
                                                and reporting requirements on registered interest groups, however, might
                                                discourage them from registering. I use an original data set compiled from
                                                several decades of lobbyist lists to determine whether these laws suppress
                                                registration rates among interest groups. More limits on campaign finance
                                                activities, but not heavier reporting burdens, are shown to be associated
                                                with depressed registration of interest groups. As unregistered interests are
                                                not subject to these regulations, this presents a paradox of political reform.
                                                Reformers can either restrict the campaign finance activities of organized
                                                interests or disclose their lobbying activities more fully, but not both. I
                                                provide estimated totals of registered interest groups given a set of laws
                                                that maximizes compliance.

                                                Keywords
                                                lobbyists, state politics, campaign finance, transparency




                                                1University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, USA


                                                Corresponding Author:
                                                James Strickland, University of Michigan, 5700 Haven Hall, 505 South State Street, Ann Arbor,
                                                MI 48109-1045, USA.
                                                Email: strickl@umich.edu
2                                                 American Politics Research 00(0)

Introduction
There is increasing concern and evidence that lobbyists and their clients may
not be complying fully with lobby registration and transparency laws in the
United States (see Thomas & LaPira, 2017). One explanation for such avoid-
ance is that lobbyists can take advantage of loopholes to conceal their activi-
ties from the public. With the recent enactment of additional ethics and
transparency laws, the imposition of executive orders pertaining to registered
lobbyists, and calls to “drain the swamp” in Washington, the effectiveness of
lobby regulations is an issue of public concern (see LaPira & Holyoke, 2017).
    Are lobby transparency laws effective at getting lobbyists and their cli-
ents to register and then report all of their activities? Moreover, do the impo-
sition of other types of laws, such as campaign finance limits, discourage
them from registering and reporting? These questions are difficult to answer
at the federal level because only one set of laws regulates those lobbyists at
any given time, and those laws are relatively new in their adoption. By con-
trast, the U.S. state governments have adopted a range of laws that restrict
and disclose interactions between lobbyists and lawmakers over the past
three decades. These laws are relatively comprehensive as by 2007, 47 states
were rated by the Center for Public Integrity as having more numerous lobby
laws than the federal government (Thomas, Hrebenar, & Nownes, 2008).
Given the different experiences of state governments in regulating lobbying
activities, researchers can gain insight into the effectiveness of different sets
of lobby laws.
    In this study, I utilize variation in lobby laws at the U.S. state level to test
a theory of compliance. Registration is the first step toward regulating and
disclosing the activities of interest groups. The act of registering is a costless
task as it usually involves submitting a short form and paying a nominal fee.
The criteria that determine who must register, however, differ across states.
While more specific sets of criteria should capture more lobbyists and inter-
est groups, the enactment of other kinds of lobby laws that affect only regis-
tered persons might dampen this positive effect. If registered lobbyists are
subject to campaign finance limits and reporting requirements, then some of
them may consider not registering. Hence, registration criteria and these
other types of laws should interact to determine how many interest groups
register. This would present a paradox of political reform. Nonregistered
lobbyists and clients are not subject to special campaign finance limits or
reporting requirements. In seeking to protect officials from undue influence
and preserve public trust in lawmaking processes, policy makers can either
maximize registration rates or regulate the activities of the registered per-
sons, but not both.
Strickland                                                                    3

    Using an original data set spanning all 50 U.S. states and three decades, I
find that campaign finance restrictions suppress registration rates for interest
groups. These findings have implications for the study of organized interests.
Contrary to the results of prior studies, they suggest that lobby laws have
some effect on registration rates. Second, numerous giving limits may be
counterproductive to the extent that they discourage agents from registering
(and also reporting their activities, once they register). As a result, lobby
transparency information provided by state authorities is somewhat unreli-
able for state-level analysis. Third, my model provides a means for estimat-
ing more accurately the sizes of interest populations in the American states
and other political systems. Based on my findings, I estimate that there might
be hundreds of unregistered, shadow groups lobbying in the U.S. states.
Ultimately, policy makers must choose between two different types of regu-
latory regimes for lobbying: a regime in which there is maximum registration
but fewer campaign finance limits, or one in which fewer interest groups
register but are subject to giving limits and reporting. Given these multiple
dimensions of lobby laws, I also suggest a need for further inquiry into the
effects of lobby laws on other activities that organized interests might engage
in. Such inquiry is timely given recent political developments in the U.S. and
political reform efforts abroad.


Lobby Transparency and Interest Populations
Regulations on lobbying are generally intended to prevent forms of corrup-
tion and make elected officials more accountable to their constituents
(Rosenthal, 2000). Among the most frequent forms of lobby laws are regis-
tration and reporting requirements. Once lobbying agents are registered, they
are required to file periodic reports disclosing varying degrees of information
to the public. A theoretical justification for lobbying regulations can be found
in the writings of deliberative democratic theorists (Chari, Hogan, & Murphy,
2010). Transparency undergirds deliberative, democratic institutions. State
attempts at regulating lobbying via registers are attempts at protecting public
trust in political institutions. They serve the purpose of providing information
to the public regarding legislative processes and reinforcing confidence in
democratic processes (Ozymy, 2010). Occasional ethics scandals, the result-
ing media coverage, and electoral consequences highlight the roles of ethics
and transparency laws in strengthening connections between voters and
elected officials (Goodman, Holp, & Ludwig, 1996).
    American state governments were among the earliest democratic regimes
in the world to regulate organized interests (Chari et al., 2010; Thomas,
1998). In 1890, Massachusetts became the first state to establish a register of
4                                                 American Politics Research 00(0)

lobbyists (Opheim, 1991). More than half the states introduced lobby regis-
tration or additional reporting requirements throughout the 1960s and 1970s
(Opheim, 1991). Arkansas and West Virginia were among the very last states
to require registration of lobbyists by an entity outside of the legislature itself,
both in the late 1980s (Hall, 1989; Thomas, 1998). State legislatures enacted
a variety of new restrictions throughout the following decades (Hamm,
Weber, & Anderson, 1994; Huckshorn, 1985). Between 1990 and 1995, a
number of states dramatically increased regulations as a consequence of
salient federal corruption probes (Gray & Lowery, 1998; Newmark, 2005).
Both Operation Boptrot in Kentucky and Operation Lost Trust in South
Carolina caught numerous lawmakers in the acts of extortion and accepting
bribes. A similar probe, Operation Tennessee Waltz, resulted in the arrests of
multiple state lawmakers in 2006. In the years following the arrests, these
states, along with Arkansas, Arizona, Georgia, Louisiana, South Dakota,
Utah, and Vermont, all increased their total lobby laws by more than 300%
(Ozymy, 2010; Ozymy, 2013). Due to scandals, at least three state legisla-
tures were called into special sessions and passed new ethics laws in the early
1990s: South Carolina’s in September 1991, Arizona’s in November 1991,
and Kentucky’s in February 1993 (Bullock, 1994). Factors other than local
scandals may also contribute to the enactment of lobby laws. Moralistic polit-
ical cultures, legislative professionalism, and term limits are all positively
associated with the enactment of additional regulations (Ozymy, 2013).
Moreover, the salience of the scandal can affect the robustness (or strictness)
of subsequent reform efforts (Crepaz, 2016). Federal scandals have also
served as an impetus for state-level reforms, as evidenced by numerous state
laws enacted after the Watergate scandal of the 1970s (Ensign, 1997).
    With persistent distrust of both lobbyists and special interests among
members of the public (see Milbrath, 1963), and occasional political scandals
and litigation, the effectiveness of ethics and transparency laws is an issue of
public concern. There is existing evidence that lobby laws are either not
obeyed or enforced as intended by regulators. Even after the adoption of the
federal Lobbying Disclosure Act in 1995, some former legislators do not reg-
ister as lobbyists but instead claim merely to be consultants hired by reputa-
ble lobbying firms. Thousands of individuals may be similar shadow lobbyists
in the nation’s capital. After 2009, the imposition of new restrictions on reg-
istered lobbyists likely dampened registration rates in subsequent years
(LaPira, 2016). However, there is also evidence that new restrictions on for-
mer congressional staff acting as lobbyists (so-called “revolvers”) discour-
aged some from lobbying (Cain & Drutman, 2014) and that lobby laws in the
states have helped to make policy outcomes more representative of state-
level public opinion (see Flavin, 2015).
Strickland                                                                     5

Do Lobby Laws Affect Interest Populations?
Throughout a series of publications, Gray and Lowery have developed a the-
ory of interest populations. Populations refers to the number of interest
groups actively lobbying within a political system. Gray and Lowery’s
Energy–Stability–Area model identifies three factors that influence the size
of interest populations. Energy represents the resources needed to sustain
lobbying. When there is “something to lobby for,” interest activity will
increase (Gray & Lowery, 1996, p. 71). Constituent interest in existing gov-
ernment goods, services, regulations, and other policies all serve as energiz-
ing factors that encourage interest activity. The stability (labeled “interest
certainty”) of these goods might also spur mobilization (Lowery & Gray,
1995). The most influential determinant of populations, however, is area or
the space needed for interest groups to operate. Groups exist where there are
constituents to serve. Without these constituents, “lobbyists have insufficient
‘space’ to survive” (Lowery & Gray, 1995, p. 10). While group totals tend to
increase with constituents, the increase is curvilinear. To find support for
their theory of group populations, Gray and Lowery turned to lobby registra-
tion data from the U.S. states.
    Comparisons of interest populations across states and time are said not to
be affected by different registration requirements or lobby laws (Gray &
Lowery, 1996, 1998; Lowery & Gray, 1994, 1997). The finding that lobby
laws may behave as constraints on registered interest populations does not call
into question the theoretical validity of the Energy–Stability–Area model but
suggests that lists of registered agents may not be accurate reflections of the
true sizes of interest communities in some states. Indeed, the cause for not
comparing totals of political action committees (PACs) has been wide varia-
tion in state registration requirements (Lowery & Brasher, 2004). While my
findings do not suggest that interest populations (or totals of groups actively
lobbying) are affected by lobby laws, they suggest that counts of registered
groups are not the most reliable indicators of the sizes of these populations. By
extension, my findings suggest that statistical “models of interest community
density” might be somewhat “misspecified” (Gray & Lowery, 1998, p. 79).
    There are conflicting expectations about how lobby laws may affect totals
of registered interest groups. While a number of articles have explored the
relationships between lobbyist or client totals and regulation stringency, they
offer contradictory conclusions. All examine single-year cross sections of
groups and regulations and do not parse out the effects of different types of
regulations. Hunter, Wilson, and Brunk (1991) were among the first to test
whether stringent (more all-encompassing) lobbying regulations affect regis-
trations. They regressed the total numbers of registered lobbyists per state on
6                                                American Politics Research 00(0)

binary indicators of frequent legal definitions of “lobbyist,” but failed to find
statistically discernible results. Hamm et al. (1994) wrote in response to
Lowery and Gray’s (1993) contention that registration criteria have little
impact on net registrations. When controlling for state population, the authors
found a positive and discernible association between totals of registered
groups and the broadness of statutory definitions of lobbying. States with
broader sets of definitions were shown to have higher registration rates,
thereby indicating that lobbying regulations may stimulate registrations of
latent groups. Hamm et al. (1994) then mentioned that group population fig-
ures may be unreliable in some states due to poor enforcement of registration
procedures.
    Other than the effects of registration criteria, it has been suggested that
other laws present barriers to lobbying. Brinig, Holcombe, and Schwartzstein
(1993, p. 377) utilized an “economic model” to portray lobby regulations as
instruments designed to benefit incumbent lawmakers and constrain lobby-
ists. Using measures of regulations and violation penalties, and examining
the ratios of bills introduced to bills passed, the authors suggested that
increased regulations generate rents for incumbent lawmakers. They assumed
that the introduction of bills is largely a costless endeavor but that the subse-
quent advocacy for such bills by lobbyists becomes more costly with
increased lobby regulation. Such added costs hypothetically force groups to
be more selective over which laws to support, thereby providing additional
information (as signals) to lawmakers about which interests are most inter-
ested in particular laws getting enacted. Lowery and Gray (1997) suggested
instead that elected officials are rarely concerned with whether lobbyists
abide by statutory regulations and that lawmakers are more concerned with
both campaign donations and the influence of groups within their districts.
They demonstrated that contrary to the theoretical expectations of Brinig
et al. (1993), increased regulations were not correlated with lower numbers of
registered groups. In addition, Brasher, Lowery, and Gray (1999) claimed to
find no impact of changing lobbying definitions on the totals of registered
lobbyists or clients in Florida and Minnesota over two decades.
    In light of these studies, the direction of expected effects of lobby defini-
tions and related laws on group totals remains unclear. While it is possible
that broader registration criteria increase totals of groups registered, regula-
tions such as campaign finance limits and reporting requirements may also
present barriers to groups from registering. It is also possible that these effects
cancel each other out so that criteria and other regulations have little impact
on total groups registered. Gray and Lowery (1996) suggested that the lack of
discernible findings may also be due to lawmakers enacting such laws as
merely symbolic acts. As in LaPira (2016), I suggest instead that interest
Strickland                                                                        7

groups consider the potential cost of being registered and likewise determine
whether or not they want to be subject to such laws. In the U.S. states, the act
of registering as a lobbyist is itself costless. It usually requires submitting a
short form and paying a nominal fee to the secretary of state’s office.
Lobbyists and clients may instead not register because it is costly to be a
registered agent. Registered lobbyists or group leaders may be subject to spe-
cial restrictions on their political activities or be required to report the details
of those activities. These laws can make compliance with registration statutes
costly for lobbyists and their clients.


A Theory of Costly Compliance
Formal laws and other political institutions can affect the decisions of firms
and individuals by changing the expected costs of particular actions (see
North, 1992). Being registered can result in an interest group having to pay at
least two costs. These costs come in the forms of campaign finance limits and
reporting requirements. When the leaders or representatives of interest groups
register, they become subject to giving limits that constrain the actions of
registered individuals. Lobbyists in some states are banned from making
campaign donations during legislative session or (in other states) at any point.
Some states also impose limits on just how much money lobbyists may con-
tribute, and still other states limit the buying of meals or gifts. Each of these
bans or limits affects practices that lobbyists rely upon for buying access,
building relationships, and achieving influence. The giving of contributions
is one of the primary means by which lobbyists achieve influence in legisla-
tive deliberations. In examining federal contributions data, Bertrand,
Bombardini, and Trebbi (2014) found that lobbyists on the Hill frequently
make donations, and that those donations tend to go to politicians working in
policy domains relevant to lobbyists’ clients. Importantly, contribution pat-
terns indicated that lobbyists are connected to particular members of
Congress, and that lobbyists change the issues they work on whenever their
connections in Congress change committee assignments. Whenever a mem-
ber of Congress transitioned from one committee (policy domain) to another,
particular lobbyists and their donations followed. While campaign contribu-
tions have not been shown to skew roll-call votes, they have been linked with
greater committee participation (Hall & Wayman, 1990) and political access,
even under experimental conditions (Chin, Bond, & Geva, 2000). Not being
able to give contributions can impede the attempts of registered lobbyists to
maintain relationships that lead to access. If a lobbyist can avoid registering
and being subject to giving constraints that do not apply to nonlobbyists, then
choosing not to register might be in his best interest (see LaPira, 2016). As a
8                                               American Politics Research 00(0)

result, we should expect numbers of registered interests to be depressed in
states with numerous campaign finance and giving limits that apply only to
lobbyists.
    Being a registered agent can also entail reporting requirements that
impose costs on group representatives. These costs come in two forms:
inconvenience and public scrutiny. Requirements for keeping records, and
regularly submitting detailed expense and compensation reports to state
authorities, present inconveniences to group leaders. In some states, group
leaders must report their activities frequently and in great detail. Registered
lobbyists might also have to report which legislative proposals they have
been working on. If the paperwork burden is too much of an inconvenience,
then this might discourage group leaders from registering as lobbyists.
Moreover, in reporting their activities, interest groups incur the cost of pub-
lic scrutiny and the exposure of their activities to other, perhaps counterac-
tive groups. If a group leader wishes not to report his political activities, then
it might be in his best interest not to register as a lobbyist. If inconvenience
and public scrutiny are costly enough for registered interests, then we should
also expect to see their totals be depressed in states with frequent or detailed
reporting requirements.


Legal Dimensions of Lobbying
While interest group leaders prefer not to bear unnecessary costs that might
hinder their lobbying efforts, they must adapt to uncertainty regarding their
institutional environments (as in Williamson, 1981). In some U.S. states,
potential registrants may be able to avoid registering as lobbyists more easily
because of their state’s lack of specific registration criteria. Without such
criteria, group leaders in the state have wider latitude for determining whether
they can lobby without registering. The absence of concrete or specific regis-
tration criteria gives groups leaders more personal discretion over whether to
register as lobbyists. The choice of whether to register is a prospective judg-
ment in which group leaders are aware beforehand of the costs of being reg-
istered. The content of state lobby laws is available to the public and usually
accessible with only a little research on the part of the group leader. Some
state agencies take precautions to advertise these laws and publish guides or
present tutorials to potential registrants. In influencing the total number of
registered interest groups or agents, the number of registration criteria in a
state should be expected to interact with the number of ethics and disclosure
laws. More numerous criteria should compel greater numbers of latent inter-
ests to register, but only in the absence of campaign finance limits or report-
ing standards that impose costs on registered groups.
Strickland                                                                       9

    I expect that definitions of lobbying, prohibited activities, and levels of
reporting stringency have different effects on a group leader’s decision to
register as a lobbyist. Definitions of the act of lobbying usually serve the
purpose of delineating which lobbyists and clients are required to register.
More numerous registration criteria can be expected to correspond with addi-
tional registrations by capturing latent interest groups and their representa-
tives. Such definitions establish several dimensions of lobbying activities:
venues (i.e., legislatures or executive agencies) and compensation, expendi-
ture, and time standards (i.e., whether lobbyists are paid or spend particular
amounts of money or time on lobbying activities). The more definitions that
a state adopts, the less discretion group representatives have in choosing
whether to register. In other words, there is less room for unregistered lobby-
ists to hide in states with more comprehensive sets of registration criteria.
Groups have maximum discretion over their own registration decisions in
states that do not specify exactly which activities require registration.
Throughout my sample, for example, the state of South Dakota has main-
tained a brief set of registration criteria that do not specify whether compen-
sation or expenditure thresholds, or even time spent lobbying, trigger required
registration. Such a brief set of lobbying definitions is expected to compel
fewer group leaders to register than the more encompassing sets of defini-
tions in most other states.
    Whether more registration criteria in a state compel more interest group
leaders to register, however, is contingent on the cost of being registered.
Campaign finance limits and reporting requirements increase this cost. While
more numerous registration criteria are expected to capture more latent
groups, this effect is contingent on there being few limits or reporting require-
ments. Hence, these two types of lobby laws should interact with registration
criteria to determine how many interest groups register. My theory implies at
least three testable hypotheses: There will be more registered interest groups
in states with more registration criteria independent of campaign finance lim-
its and reporting requirements, but limits on giving and reporting burdens
should each independently depress this effect. Variations in laws across the
U.S. states provide for different regulatory environments in which lobbyists
and their clients are faced with different sets of registration criteria and costs.
I turn next to the measurement of these concepts.

Data and Hypotheses
Yearly counts of registered interest groups (also known as clients, principals,
or employers) within states serve as the response variable in this study. Even
though groups must designate representatives (lobbyists) to act on their
10                                              American Politics Research 00(0)

behalf, I examine group totals because lobbyist totals really capture the “the
intensity of organizational effort” that groups expend (Gray & Lowery,
1996). Many registered clients hire multiple lobbyists who may be members
of lobbying firms. A group’s decision over whether to hire single-client or
multiclient lobbyists, or both, presents a challenge to measuring how many
lobbyists fail to register. Totals of registered interest groups provide the “most
valid indicator of broadscale political activity” that Gray and Lowery (1996,
p. 7) were interested in. As illustrated in the box plot in Figure 1, totals of
registered interest groups (or clients of lobbyists) varied by year throughout
the 1990s and 2000s. The highest totals ever counted were more than 4,000
groups registered in New York, whose totals consistently were outliers. The
lowest count was in Wyoming where 72 groups were registered at the end of
1999 (Newmark, 2008). Figure 1 reports totals only for years in which I have
data for all 50 states. In accordance with the hypotheses of Gray and Lowery
(1996), states with the largest economies contained the most interest groups.


Explanatory Variables
To gain a sense of how lobby laws have changed over time, I employ a mea-
sure of lobby law stringency that spans multiple states and years. Newmark’s
(2005) measure assumes values from 0 to 18 depending on the presence or
absence of specific lobby laws. In this index, lobby laws come in three cate-
gories: definitions of lobbyists, prohibitions on their conduct, and reporting
requirements. I utilize the three categories of lobby laws in Newmark’s index
as separate explanatory variables. Table 1 lists all 18 laws included in
Newmark’s scale. The sources for Newmark’s measurements are annual Blue
Books published by the Council on Governmental Ethics Laws and Council
of State Governments. Throughout the 1980s and 1990s, the Councils con-
ducted surveys of state ethics agencies to determine which laws were in
effect. Newmark’s scale has been used elsewhere to test hypotheses regard-
ing policy representation (e.g., Flavin, 2015). As Newmark’s data covered
only the years 1991 to 2003, I extended the index to cover the years 1988 to
2013 using a method described in the appendix.
    Statutory definitions determine which groups must register. Each defini-
tion delineates an additional dimension of the act of lobbying that is expected
to compel additional lobbyists and their clients to register (e.g., by lobbying
legislators, being paid to lobby, making expenditures). States assigned higher
scores on this measure are casting wider nets that should apply to the activi-
ties of additional clients. The second component of Newmark’s measure cap-
tures legal prohibitions. These include four acts that are limited or banned in
particular states. Two of these acts are partially inclusive: Lobbyists are
Strickland                                                                    11




Figure 1. Registered Interests in the U.S. States, 1989-2013.


prohibited from making donations during legislative sessions if they are also
prohibited from making such donations at any time. In some states, the con-
verse may not be true and lobbyists may freely give when the legislature is
not in session. This partial inclusivity does not threaten the ability of the
measure to capture the numerosity of prohibitions. Another component of
Newmark’s measure captures reporting stringency. The measure reflects the
frequency and details of required disclosure reports. Reporting requirements
address how much detail lobbyists must disclose about their lobbying activi-
ties and clients. As with the prohibitions scale, some components are partially
inclusive. The presence of each component adds an additional point to each
measure. The sources of my regulation data are described in the appendix.
    As described in my theory, I expect that different components of Newmark’s
index have countervailing or interactive effects on interest group registrations.
More numerous definitions are expected to capture additional groups (via
their lobbyists) only in the absence of numerous prohibitions or heavy report-
ing requirements. With such requirements in place, however, the ability of
definitions to capture more groups is moderated or perhaps neutralized.
Therefore, I employ interactive terms to capture these moderating effects and
expect them both to be negatively associated with totals of registered interest
groups (i.e., have negative regression coefficients). Negative interactive coef-
ficients should indicate that prohibitions and reporting requirements have
12                                                American Politics Research 00(0)

Table 1. Newmark’s Measure of Lobby Regulations.
Definitions of lobbyists include the following:
   •• Those seeking to lobby the legislature
   •• Those seeking to lobby administrative agencies
   •• Elected officials acting as lobbyists
   •• Public employees acting as lobbyists
   •• Compensation standards
   •• Expenditure standards
   •• Time standards
Prohibited activities involving lobbyists include the following:
   •• Making campaign contributions at any time
   •• Making campaign contributions during legislative sessions
   •• Making expenditures in excess of a certain dollar amount per official per year
   •• Solicitation by officials or employees for contributions or gifts
Reporting requirements for lobbyists include the following:
   •• Semiannual or more frequent reporting for lobbyists or their employers
   •• Name of targeted legislation or administrative action
   •• Expenditures benefiting public officials or employees
   •• Compensation received, broken down by employer(s) or employee(s)
   •• Total compensation received
   •• Categories of expenditures made
   •• Total expenditure made

Source. Newmark (2005).


moderating effects on how well more definitions capture more groups (i.e., by
decreasing the marginal effect of definitions on registrations).

Confounding Variables
For predicting client totals via regression, I include a control for the size of a
state’s gross product or economic output. Interest group registrations tend to
be greatest in states with the largest economies. Economic activity is said to be
the “fundamental basis of [political] organization” (Schattschneider, 1960;
Schlozman, 1984, pp. 1011-1015) and has been shown to be the chief determi-
nant of registration totals (Gray & Lowery, 1996, pp. 85-93). In other words,
measures for economic activity have been shown to provide the best proxy for
sizes of what Schattschneider (1960) called the “unknown associational uni-
verses” of political systems (p. 31). In numerous studies of interest popula-
tions, Gray and Lowery (1996, 1998); Lowery and Gray (1993,1994) have
controlled for the size of a state’s economy. They discovered that American
Strickland                                                                     13

states with the smallest economies contained a natural threashold of interest
groups, and that states with the largest economies tended to house even more
groups but at a declining rate. Therefore, I include a control for economy size
in polynomial form. As in prior studies of client totals, I expect the first coef-
ficient to be positive and the second negative. This would demonstrate declin-
ing marginal increases in group figures within states (i.e., as state economies
grow, the growth rate of interest group totals decreases). Economic measures
were provided by the Bureau of Economic Analysis in 1997 real U.S. dollars.1
For ease of interpretation, state economy size was first divided into trillions of
dollars. This variable therefore measures how many trillions of U.S. dollars in
economic output were produced within a state and year.
    Berkman (2001) and Kattelman (2015) have suggested that legislative pro-
fessionalism might affect the mobilization of interest groups. Berkman pro-
poses that state legislatures with more staff members, greater incomes, and
longer sessions can generate legislation more independently of the influence
of interests. As interest groups might serve the function of providing needed
information to legislators, interest group numbers were supposed and shown
to be depressed in states with more professional legislatures with better-
informed and better-paid lawmakers. In particular, professionalism served the
purpose of decreasing the rate of growth in groups among states with larger
economies. Kattelman (2015) approached the relationship between profes-
sionalism and groups differently. He suggested that more professionalization
of legislatures should result in greater interest mobilization. Such profession-
alization allows legislatures not only to generate more detailed policies but
also to “capitalize on the information supply that groups provide” (Kattelman,
2015, p. 171). Greater session length is said to encourage more contact with
constituents and interests, and more staff are said to serve as additional lobby-
ing access points for groups. Although it is also possible that both hypotheses
might be correct and therefore nullify any effect of professionalism seen
within my data, it is important to hold professionalism constant because it
might also lead to more lobby laws (Opheim, 1991; Ozymy, 2013). I include
Squire’s (2007) index of legislative professionalism within my models, with
2009 updates provided by Squire. I have no particular expectations for the
directionality of professionalism’s effect on groups.
    I also attempt to capture circumstances that might encourage interest
mobilization by considering the effects of electoral competition and initia-
tives in my model. There is evidence that electoral competition may stimulate
more interest groups to mobilize and register. Competition can be considered
a component of Lowery and Gray’s (1995) “interest certainty” term (p. 12).
Interest groups may perceive that the likelihood of policy change is higher in
states with more evenly divided legislatures or more competitive elections.
14                                              American Politics Research 00(0)

Such competition therefore energizes more interest groups to mobilize and
register, as a way of hedging their bets. Using Ranney (1976) indices aver-
aged over 7 years, Gray and Lowery (1998, 1999) found that less party com-
petition was associated with fewer groups. Party polarization within
legislatures does not seem to attenuate this connection (Gray, Cluverius,
Harden, Shor, & Lowery, 2015). As in Gray et al. (2015), I employ modified
Ranney indices (Klarner, 2010) that accurately reflect party competition
within legislatures. Specifically, I include 6-year averages within my models
that are folded so that higher values indicate greater one-party dominance.
Based on prior findings, this variable should be negatively correlated with
registered interests.
    Initiatives might also be considered an energizing influence for interest
groups. Using a regression specification similar to the one employed here,
Boehmke (2005) found that initiative states contained, on average, 28% more
interest groups than noninitiative states, ceteris paribus. In particular, citizen
interests were more active in states with such direct democracy techniques.
To control for the effects of such techniques on registration totals (and esti-
mate better the effects of lobby regulations), my models include a dichoto-
mous indicator for whether a state allowed for direct or indirect initiatives for
either statutory or constitutional changes, or popular referenda. Throughout
my sample, direct democracy could be found in 26 states. As some initiatives
and referenda have historically resulted in greater lobby regulation or trans-
parency, including a variable for initiative status helps to address the possibil-
ity of spurious relationships. This variable should be positively associated
with registrations.2
    In prior studies of interest populations, other controls have been introduced
for theoretical reasons that did not deliver increased explanatory power.
Testing a theory introduced by the Virginia school (i.e., public choice) of inter-
est mobilization, Lowery and Gray (1995) found that the size of state govern-
ment was not discernibly correlated with interest density. The age of a state’s
governing institutions was also not a strong predictor of density, as suggested
by Olson (1982). As these variables were shown not to be predictors of group
registrations, I exclude them from my statistical estimations. In some studies,
indicators were used to mark particular outliers (such as Florida in 1990, when
a budget battle resulted in more registrations; see Brasher et al., 1999). As the
budget battle was ephemeral and Florida’s registration totals have since come
to resemble those of states of similar sizes (see Figure 1), I do not include an
indicator for this outlier within my models. Table 2 presents descriptive statis-
tics for each of my response and explanatory variables only for observations
from year listed in Figure 1.
Strickland                                                                   15

Table 2. Summary Statistics for Complete Panels.

Variable                  Minimum 25% Median 75% Maximum            M      SD
Number of groups             72     451     724 1,177    4,202    923     697
Real gross state           0.014   0.046   0.121 0.237   1.651    0.198   0.247
  product (trillions of
  U.S. dollars)
Legislative                0.031   0.116   0.163 0.224   0.659    0.192   0.124
  professionalism
One-party dominance        0.002   0.048   0.114 0.181   0.374    0.124   0.087
Initiative state             0       0       1     1       1      0.537   0.499
Lobby definitions            1       2       4     5       7      3.8     1.6
Lobby prohibitions           0       0       1     2       4      1.1     1.2
Reporting                    0       4       5     7       7      4.8     1.9
  requirements



Estimation Method and Results
In modeling total registered interest groups, I treat this outcome as a count
variable (á la Boehmke, 2005 and Lowry, 2005, among others). For this count
variable, I estimated negative binominal regression coefficients to account
for overdispersion where the model-conditional variances exceeded model-
conditional means (see King, 1988; Long, 1997). I estimated models for both
my entire sample of all data available for all years and for a restricted sample
of 12 years that includes counts from all 50 states. The first model in Table 3
was estimated using data from all available counts for all states and years,
including panel waves for which many states’ totals were unobserved. For the
second model, I repeated this procedure but included the variable for party
competition. As the Nebraska Unicameral is a nonpartisan chamber, Models
2 and 4 exclude values from that state. The third model estimates the effects
of my variables on group totals only for years in which observations from all
50 states were available (the 12 years are listed in Figure 1).
   As I am working with panel data in which observations are nested within
50 states, the correlation between my observations violates the least squares
assumption of independent errors. Each state presents its own “contextual”
factors that may influence each of the clusters (by state) of my observations
(Steenbergen & Jones, 2002). Due to the structure of my data, state-level
random effects are included in my models. The inclusion of state-level fixed
effects in a model employing the unconditional negative binomial variance
function leads to the incidental parameters problem in which degrees of free-
dom are insufficient for estimation (see Allison & Waterman, 2002). The use
16                                                    American Politics Research 00(0)

Table 3. Lobby Laws and Shadow Interests (Count Models).

                                 Model 1        Model 2          Model 3         Model 4

                                   All             All          Complete        Complete
                                observed        observed         panels          panels
Gross state product              3.120***        3.121***        3.360***        3.328***
                                (0.172)         (0.174)         (0.211)         (0.214)
Gross state product2            −1.011***       −1.006***       −1.069***       −1.031***
                                (0.082)         (0.084)         (0.104)         (0.106)
Legislative professionalism     −0.953***       −0.957***       −0.966***       −0.981***
                                (0.164)         (0.166)         (0.216)         (0.219)
One-party dominance               —             −0.079            —             −0.337**
                                                (0.108)                         (0.149)
Initiative state                 0.376***        0.370***        0.307***        0.284***
                                (0.074)         (0.074)         (0.079)         (0.079)
Lobby definitions                0.023           0.024           0.025           0.028
                                (0.023)         (0.023)         (0.027)         (0.027)
Lobby prohibitions               0.141***        0.142***        0.245***        0.256***
                                (0.034)         (0.034)         (0.049)         (0.050)
Reporting requirements           0.049***        0.048***        0.036           0.027
                                (0.018)         (0.019)         (0.023)         (0.024)
Definitions × Prohibitions      −0.015**        −0.016**        −0.036***       −0.038***
                                (0.007)         (0.007)         (0.011)         (0.011)
Definitions × Reporting          0.004           0.004           0.006           0.006
                                (0.004)         (0.004)         (0.005)         (0.006)
Constant                         2.065***        2.067***        1.948***        2.013***
                                (0.098)         (0.101)         (0.114)         (0.120)
ln(α)                            2.040           2.038           2.177           2.195
                                (0.217)         (0.218)         (0.222)         (0.222)
ln(β)                            5.517           5.531           5.781           5.815
                                (0.232)         (0.234)         (0.242)         (0.242)
Observations                      931             916              600             588
No. of states                      50              49               50              49
Log likelihood                   −6,153          −6,063          −4,015          −3,941
AIC                              12,330          12,153           8,055           7,909

Note. Standard errors are in parentheses. Random effects are assumed to have a beta
distribution with shape parameters α and β. AIC = Akaike information criterion.
**p < .05, two-tailed. ***p < .01, two-tailed.


of random effects by state allows my models to utilize variation between
states (as opposed only to within states over time). This is preferred because
Strickland                                                                    17

lobby laws and most of my other covariates tend to change slowly within
states. I also estimated linear regression models to include state-level fixed
effects and isolate the effects of changes in lobby laws over time within
states. In Table 4, the linear models include state-level fixed effects to help
control for factors specific to each state not included within my data and year-
level fixed effects to control for nationwide trends. The inclusion of year-
level effects helps to control for recent growth in lobbying activity nationwide,
as illustrated by Figure 1 (Drutman, 2015; Gray & Lowery, 2003). As with
Table 3, the four models differ by sample size and selection of variables.
    Tables 3 and 4 present consistent evidence for most of my hypotheses. As
expected, the size of a state’s economy is the leading predictor of interest
populations in terms of both sheer magnitude and statistical correlation. The
relationship between economic output and group totals is not linear as totals
increase at a declining marginal rate with economic growth. In terms of leg-
islative professionalism, my results suggest clearly that there are fewer reg-
istered interest groups in states with more professionalized legislatures, even
after holding constant the effects of economic output. The results might be
due to the informational substitution theory of Berkman (2001) or some
other process. Contrary to the findings of prior studies, there are not consis-
tent differences in client registration rates according to legislative party
dominance. In accordance with the findings of Boehmke (2005), however,
states in which initiatives or referenda might occur also have more interest
groups on average.
    With regard to lobby laws, model results are mixed but conclusively
suggest that the number of campaign finance limits in a state affects rates
of registration among interest groups. The effects of criteria are contingent
on the presence of prohibitions. When interacted with registration criteria,
prohibitions suppress the positive effect of more criteria on total registra-
tions. In other words, registration criteria capture fewer interest groups in
states with more limits on giving. Figure 2 shows predicted counts of total
groups based on two different prohibitions conditions, with 95% confi-
dence intervals. Based on the model predictions, the presence of four pro-
hibitions on political conduct is associated with hundreds of missing interest
groups. The predicted counts are based on the coefficients from Model 7 in
Table 4. All states within my sample with maximum prohibitions always
had between two and six registration criteria. For reporting requirements,
my expectations are mostly disconfirmed. Coefficients for this variable,
however, often failed to achieve traditional levels of statistical
significance.
    To illustrate the predictive utility of my models and how prohibitions on
campaign donations sometimes result in fewer interest groups registering
18                                                       American Politics Research 00(0)

Table 4. Lobby Laws and Shadow Interests (Linear Models).

                                   Model 5         Model 6          Model 7          Model 8

                                      All             All          Complete         Complete
                                   observed        observed         panels           panels
Gross state product               5,197***        5,140***         5,081***         5,060***
                                    (405)           (411)            (508)            (516)
Gross state product2              −1,331***       −1,318***        −1,174***        −1,165***
                                    (176)           (178)            (229)            (232)
Legislative professionalism        −558***         −570***          −739**           −743**
                                    (211)           (213)            (295)            (299)
One-party dominance                   —               51               —               −44
                                                    (126)                             (174)
Initiative state                      336           346**              343             330
                                     (172)          (175)             (195)           (203)
Lobby definitions                      15             16                23              22
                                      (22)           (23)              (26)            (26)
Lobby prohibitions                  102***           97**            194***          193***
                                      (38)           (39)              (58)            (59)
Reporting requirements              −42**           −38**            −47**           −48**
                                      (18)           (19)              (23)            (24)
Definitions × Prohibitions          −22***          −21**            −42***          −42***
                                       (8)            (8)              (13)            (13)
Definitions × Reporting               9**              9              12**            12**
                                       (5)            (5)               (6)             (6)
Constant                               20              2                10              20
                                     (120)          (127)             (125)           (132)
Observations                          931             916             600              588
No. of states                          50              49              50               49
Adjusted R2                           .889            .889            .891             .890

Note. Standard errors are in parentheses. State and year fixed effects included in all models
but not reported.
**p < .05, two-tailed. ***p < .01, two-tailed.


(thereby resulting in less political transparency), I calculate predicted num-
bers of registered groups under a hypothetical condition of maximum defini-
tions, zero prohibitions, and maximum reporting. Such predicted totals can
be said to be the maximum potential group totals a state could ever register,
given the “right” lobby laws. Figure 3 compares the maximum potential cli-
ents to the totals of groups that actually registered in each state-year. As with
Figure 2, these predictions are based on the results in Model 7. Figure 3
Strickland                                                               19




Figure 2. Predicted clients under two prohibitions conditions.




Figure 3. Potential client registrations versus actual registrations.


illustrates the depressing effect of campaign finance limits on registration
rates among interest groups. The lack of numerous definitions and the pres-
ence of multiple ethics prohibitions suppress registration among interest
20                                             American Politics Research 00(0)

groups. At an aggregated level, 57,815 unique interest groups registered in
the U.S. states in 2013 (the latest year for which I have data). By contrast, my
model predicts that approximately 72,091 groups might have registered if
there had been detailed registration criteria and no campaign finance restric-
tions or reporting requirements.3 In some single states and years, the differ-
ence amounts to several hundred groups. The biggest differences were found
in New York. Whereas 1,365 groups registered there in 1999, the model pre-
dicts that 2,670 could have registered. Registration rates have improved since
the state enacted the Public Employee Ethics Reform Act in 2007. In a few
other states, lobby laws were surprisingly effective at capturing groups. In
Washington, where the citizen-initiated Public Disclosure Commission over-
sees extensive lobby registration and transparency measures, the number of
clients who registered consistently approached the maximum potential. Such
a set of laws provides promise for reformers.


Discussion and Conclusion
Any analysis of lobby registration data should examine both the scope of
criteria and the effects of separate laws that affect registered agents and cli-
ents. While prior studies have failed to find discernible relationships between
lobby laws and registration rates, none of them examined how registrations
change in response to criteria and other laws that impose costs on registered
groups. Prior studies employed as explanatory variables either counts of all
laws or only registration criteria. I conducted a more thorough examination
that parsed apart the separate and interactive effects of changes in criteria,
giving limits, and reporting stringency over more than two decades. In doing
this, I addressed a long-standing and unresolved debate on the effects of
lobby laws on interest registrations. My models advanced our understanding
of lobby law compliance also by employing specifications that are more
appropriate for analyzing panel data.
    My findings provide evidence of a paradox of political reform. Regulating
the campaign finance activities of registered lobbyists and interest groups
may simply drive more of them to lobby in an unregistered, shadow capacity.
As unregistered lobbyists and their clients are not subject to these restric-
tions, imposing more of them might be counterproductive for both ethics and
transparency. Reformers face a trade-off: They can have either more interest
groups register and report their activities or attempt to limit their campaign
finance activities. Reformers cannot achieve both goals simultaneously. This
suggests that group leaders act strategically when it comes to compliance
with lobby laws and that ethics reform may come at a cost to transparency.
Such findings should be of little surprise given evidence that lobbyists and
Strickland                                                                               21

interest groups modify their tactics in response to restrictions on serving in
federal advisory roles (LaPira & Herschel, 2017), the imposition of other
types of campaign finance laws (Hogan, 2005), the potential for direct
democracy (Boehmke, 2005; Gerber, 1999), and laws that affect the forma-
tion of PACs (Gais, 1996). Indeed,

   lobbyists are among the most experienced, astute, and strategic actors one can
   find in the everyday practice of American policy making . . . . If there is a class
   of actors for whom rational choice–even complete information–models should
   do good explanatory work, lobbyists ought to be it. (Hall & Deardorff, 2006,
   p. 70)

    My findings have implications for reform efforts in both the United States
and abroad. The recent enactment of the Honest Leadership and Open
Government Act of 2007 and issuing of executive orders related to lobbyists
suggest that policy makers are interested in how to control the influence of
lobbyists. Analyses of these recent changes suggest that a similar paradox of
reform may be playing out in the nation’s capital (see LaPira, 2016; Thomas
& LaPira, 2017). As opposed to attempting to regulate the activities of lobby-
ists directly, however, transparency might be the better approach (see Lane,
1964). As policy makers outside of the United States continue to experiment
with various regulations on lobbyists, they can infer lessons from regulations
in the states. Not only do the states have more numerous and robust lobby
laws than the federal government, their laws are most stringent by interna-
tional standards (see Chari et al., 2010). Any unintended consequences cre-
ated by the most detailed lobby laws in the world might persist or even be
worsened in nations with less comprehensive regulations.
    As for Gray and Lowery’s (1996) Energy–Stability–Area model, it is
largely confirmed but made more precise by my findings. Most coefficients
within my models support their related hypotheses, but these were intended
to serve as statistical controls. Even after adjusting for such factors as eco-
nomic output, legislative professionalism, party strength, and direct democ-
racy, lobby laws exert discernible influence on the decisions of groups to
register. Future studies of interest populations should take these laws into
account. The sheer total of registered interests is an insufficient measure for
the populations of interest groups who are lobbying members of each state’s
legislature. When working with group registration data that span either states
or years, researchers should attempt to control for differences in registration
compliance. In statistical regression, this can be achieved by including the
variables on lobby laws that I constructed (please see the appendix).
22                                             American Politics Research 00(0)

    As with any study, my findings have limitations. My findings do not speak
to how lobby laws may affect the relationship between interest groups and
their agents. It remains to be seen, for example, whether more or fewer laws,
or even specific types of laws, cause interest groups to hire multiclient lobby-
ists over in-house agents. My findings also do not explore how lobby laws
affect the composition of interest populations. Just as Boehmke (2008) found
that direct democracy techniques lead to more citizen interests being regis-
tered, it remains to be seen how lobby laws may affect the registration rates
of these clients. Finally, the need for more precise measurement of lobby
laws remains (see Newmark, 2017). My findings suggest that such laws may
serve a variety of functions and outline different dimensions of political
mobilization. The variety of policy options designed to restrict and reveal the
activities of lobbyists and their clients, however, presents difficulties for
those seeking to compare compliance across multiple regimes and years.
Nevertheless, this study brings us closer to a fuller understanding of how lob-
byists and clients strategically adapt to lobby laws and how lobby laws might
be tailored in response.


Appendix
Sources and Coding of Lobby Laws
For many years, the Council on Governmental Ethics Laws published bien-
nial Blue Books of campaign finance, ethics, and lobbying laws in the
American states. Beginning in the 1970s, the Council’s data on lobbying
regulations were condensed under three subheadings found in the Council of
State Governments’ biennial Book of the States: definitions of lobbying, pro-
hibited activities involving lobbyists, and registration and reporting require-
ments. Within each edition, binary indicators were used to mark the presence
of individual regulations by state. These indicators formed the basis of the
index of lobby laws developed by Newmark (2005) and were published until
the 2005 edition.
   Measures of lobbying definitions, prohibitions, and reports for years 1988
to 2003 were gathered directly from various editions of the Council on
Governmental Ethics Laws’ Campaign Finance, Ethics and Lobby Blue Book
and the Council of State Governments’ Book of the States. For measures of
lobbying definitions, prohibitions, and reports after 2004, I used annual edi-
tions of the Lobbying, PACs, and Campaign Finance: 50 State Handbook
compiled by the State Capital Law Firm Group. Individual chapters of the
Handbooks include details on lobbying registration requirements, prohibited
activities, and disclosure requirements for each of the 50 states. As the
Strickland                                                                  23

Handbooks provide qualitatively different information from that of the Book
of the States, the 2003 Handbook edition was treated as a basis for compari-
son to the 2003 Book of the States data. If, according to post-2003 Handbooks,
lobby laws did not change within a state before 2013, then 2003 values from
the Books of the States were extended to subsequent years. If Handbooks did
indicate changes in existing lobby laws after 2003, then I first determined
whether there had been changes to definitions, prohibitions, or reports and
then made the necessary adjustments in the lobby law measure. This method
allowed me to employ a consistent coding scheme across sources.
    My coding of lobby laws has face validity. The measures reflect the numer-
ous ethics reforms passed in response to political scandals in the early 1990s.
The measures also capture more recent reforms, such as the 1996 citizen-ini-
tiated Maine Clean Election Act, the 2003 State Officials and Employees
Ethics Act in Illinois, the 2006 State Government Ethics Act in North Carolina,
and the 2010 Alabama reforms passed during a special session, among other
changes. The scales even capture the occasional elimination of lobby laws
sometimes due to legislation (i.e., so-called “ethics in name only” bills) or
court action (when such laws are challenged on constitutional grounds). For
example, the elimination and reintroduction of lobby laws that occured in
Pennsylvania between 2002 and 2007 are reflected in my coding. Moreover,
Iowa actually weakened its reporting standards in 2011 when it reverted back
to annual reporting from monthly reporting. By and large, however, the U.S.
state governments have more lobby laws now than ever before.

Sources of Group Totals and Model Specifications
Counts of registered interest groups were compiled from a variety of sources.
To ensure the greatest accuracy, I relied on a prioritization scheme. Where
available, counts published in state documents and registration reports were
consulted first. These documents were available mostly online and also in
state archives and libraries, and occasionally on request from the relevant
state officials. Figures provided directly from state offices or in state docu-
ments were considered the most reliable. In many cases, I also counted the
number of groups from lists published by state agencies. Where state-pub-
lished totals or lists were not available, counts for 1989 were compiled from
Wilson (1990). Counts for 1990, 1997, 1998, and 1999 were gathered from
Gray and Lowery (1996), Lowery and Brasher (2004), Lowery, Gray, and
Cluverius (2015), and Newmark (2008), respectively. All these counts were
later compiled by Jordan and Grossmann (2016) and had been calculated
using lists of registered interests collected mostly by “mail or web page from
state agencies” (Gray, Lowery, & Benz, 2013, p. 91). Group counts for more
24                                                 American Politics Research 00(0)

recent years (2006-2013) are mostly from the National Institute on Money in
State Politics. These lists of lobbyist–client dyads were all cleaned of dupli-
cate entries prior to the number of unique clients being counted. The data set
used for this project indicates the source of each count. In Pennsylvania and
New Jersey, lobbying firms were included in the total of registered groups
because firms also had to register.
   While each model regresses contemporaneous values of the outcome
against contemporaneous values of the input, there are data management
issues to making sure that the input is always observed temporally before the
outcome. In the models I present, yearly registrations are regressed against
available measures of regulations that immediately preceded them. More
recent counts from the Institute are regressed against regulations from
October of each year. Personal correspondence with an editor of the Lobbying,
PACs, and Campaign Finance: 50 State Handbooks revealed that authors
have until October of each preceding calendar year to finalize updates on
state lobbying regulations.

Declaration of Conflicting Interests
The author(s) declared no potential conflicts of interest with respect to the research,
authorship, and/or publication of this article.

Funding
The author(s) received no financial support for the research, authorship, and/or publi-
cation of this article.

Notes
1.   Measurements of gross state product for years 1988 to 1997 were calculated
     using the Standard Industrial Classification (SIC) system. Figures for 1998 to
     2013 were calculated using the North American Industry Classification System
     (NAICS). All statistics were adjusted to 1997 chained dollars using quantity
     indices provided by the Bureau.
2.   I also estimated my models by replacing a state’s initiative status with a count
     of the number of initiatives appearing on a ballot within a given state-year. The
     number of initiatives did not have a statistically discernible effect on group
     registrations.
3.   This might come as little surprise given that there are likely just as many unreg-
     istered advocates in the nation’s capital (see Thomas & LaPira, 2017).

References
Allison, P. D., & Waterman, R. P. (2002). Fixed effects negative binomial regression
     models. Sociological Methodology, 32, 247-265.
Strickland                                                                           25

Berkman, M. B. (2001). Legislative professionalism and the demand for groups: The
    institutional context of interest population density. Legislative Studies Quarterly,
    26, 661-679.
Bertrand, M., Bombardini, M., & Trebbi, F. (2014). Is it whom you know or what
    you know? An empirical assessment of the lobbying process. The American
    Economic Review, 104, 3885-3920.
Boehmke, F. J. (2005). The indirect effect of direct legislation: How institutions shape
    interest group systems. Columbus: Ohio State University Press.
Boehmke, F. J. (2008). The initiative process and the dynamics of state interest group
    populations. State Politics and Policy Quarterly, 8, 362-383.
Brasher, H., Lowery, D., & Gray, V. (1999). State lobby registration data: The anom-
    alous case of Florida (and Minnesota Too!). Legislative Studies Quarterly, 24,
    303-314.
Brinig, M. F., Holcombe, R. G., & Schwartzstein, L. (1993). The regulation of lobby-
    ists. Public Choice, 77, 377-384.
Bullock, J. (1994). State lobby laws in the 1990s. In The book of the states (Vol. 30,
    pp. 486-89). Lexington, KY: Council of State Governments.
Cain, B. E., & Drutman, L. (2014). Congressional staff and the revolving door: The
    impact of regulatory change. Election Law Journal: Rules, Politics, and Policy,
    13, 27-44.
Chari, R., Hogan, J., & Murphy, G. (2010). Regulating lobbying: A global compari-
    son. Manchester, UK: University of Manchester Press.
Chin, M., Bond, J. R., & Geva, N. (2000). A foot in the door: An experimental study
    of PAC and constituency effects on access. The Journal of Politics, 62, 534-549.
Crepaz, M. (2016). Investigating the robustness of lobby laws: Evidence from the
    Austrian case. Interest Groups and Advocacy, 5, 5-24.
Drutman, L. (2015). The business of America is lobbying: How corporations became
    politicized and politics became more corporate. Oxford, UK: Oxford University
    Press.
Ensign, D. (1997). Reforming public integrity laws in an era of declining trust. In
    The book of the states (Vol. 31, pp. 477-84). Lexington, KY: Council of State
    Governments.
Flavin, P. (2015). Lobbying regulations and political equality in the American states.
    American Politics Research, 43, 304-326.
Gais, T. (1996). Improper influence: Campaign finance law, political interest groups,
    and the problem of equality. Ann Arbor: University of Michigan Press.
Gerber, E. R. (1999). The populist paradox: Interest group influence and the promise
    of direct legislation. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
Goodman, M. R., Holp, T. J., & Ludwig, K. M. (1996). Understanding state legisla-
    tive ethics reform: The importance of political and institutional culture. In J. S.
    Bowman (Ed.), Public integrity annual, pp. 51-57. Lexington, KY: Council of
    State Governments.
Gray, V., Cluverius, J., Harden, J. J., Shor, B., & Lowery, D. (2015). Party competi-
    tion, party polarization, and the changing demand for lobbying in the American
    states. American Politics Research, 43, 175-204.
26                                                 American Politics Research 00(0)

Gray, V., & Lowery, D. (1996). The population ecology of interest representa-
    tion: Lobbying communities in the American states. Ann Arbor: University of
    Michigan Press.
Gray, V., & Lowery, D. (1998). State lobbying regulations and their enforce-
    ment: Implications for the diversity of interest communities. State and Local
    Government Review, 30, 78-91.
Gray, V., & Lowery, D. (2003). Trends in lobbying in the states. In The book of the
    states (Vol. 35, pp. 257-62). Lexington, KY: Council of State Governments.
Gray, V., Lowery, D. and Benz, J. K. (2013). Interest Groups and Health Care Reform
    Across the United States. Washington: Georgetown University Press.
Hall, R. T. (1989). The West Virginia Governmental Ethics Act. The West Virginia
    Public Affairs Reporter, 6, 1-7.
Hall, R. L. & Wayman, F. (1990). Buying time: Moneyed interests and the mobiliza-
    tion of bias in congressional committee. American Political Science Review, 84,
    797-820.
Hall, R. L., & Deardorff, A. V. (2006). Lobbying as legislative Subsidy. American
    Political Science Review, 100, 69-84.
Hamm, K. E., Weber, A. R., & Anderson, R. B. (1994). The impact of lobbying laws
    and their enforcement: A contrasting view. Social Science Quarterly, 75, 378-381.
Hogan, R. E. (2005). State campaign finance laws and interest Group electioneering
    activities. Journal of Politics, 67, 887-906.
Honest Leadership and Open Government Act of 2007, 2 USC §§ 1601 - 1614.
Huckshorn, R. J. (1985). Who gave it who got it? The enforcement of campaign
    finance laws in the states. Journal of Politics, 21, 261-271.
Hunter, K. G., Wilson, L. A., & Brunk, G. G. (1991). Societal complexity and inter-
    est-group lobbying in the American states. Journal of Politics, 53, 488-503.
Jordan, M. P., & Grossmann, M. (2016). The correlates of state policy project
    (Version. 1.0). East Lansing: MI: Institute for Public Policy and Social Research.
Kattelman, K. T. (2015). Legislative professionalism and group concentration: The
    ESA model revisited. Interest Groups and Advocacy, 4, 165-184.
King, G. (1988). Statistical models for political science event counts: Bias in conven-
    tional procedures and evidence for the Exponential Poisson Regression Model.
    American Journal of Political Science, 32, 838-863.
Klarner, C. (2010). Forecasting control of state governments and redistricting author-
    ity after the 2010 elections. The Forum, 8, Article 14.
Lane, E. (1964). Lobbying and the Law. Berkeley: University of California Press.
LaPira, T. M. (2016). Lobbying in the shadows: How private interests hide from pub-
    lic scrutiny and why that matters. In A. J. Cigler, B. A. Loomis, & A. J. Nownes
    (Eds.), Interest group politics, pp. 224-48. Washington, DC: CQ Press.
LaPira, T. M., & Herschel, T. F., III. (2017). Revolving door lobbying: Public ser-
    vice, private influence, and the unequal representation of interests. Lawrence:
    University Press of Kansas.
LaPira, T. M., & Holyoke, T. T. (2017). Draining the swamp or cultivating the wet-
    lands? Toward evidence-based lobbying regulation and reform. Interest Groups
    and Advocacy, 6, 195-198.
Strickland                                                                           27

Long, S. (1997). Regression models for categorical and limited dependent variables.
    Thousand Oaks, CA: SAGE.
Lowery, D., & Brasher, H. (2004). Organized interests and American government.
    Boston, MA: McGraw-Hill.
Lowery, D., & Gray, V. (1993). The density of state interest group systems. The
    Journal of Politics, 55, 191-206.
Lowery, D., & Gray, V. (1994). Do Lobbying Regulations Influence Lobbying
    Registrations? Social Science Quarterly 75, no. 2: 382-4.
Lowery, D., & Gray, V. (1995). The population ecology of Gucci Gulch, or the natural
    regulation of interest group numbers in the American states. American Political
    Science Review, 39, 1-29.
Lowery, D., & Gray, V. (1997). How some rules just don’t matter: The regulation of
    lobbyists. Public Choice, 91, 139-147.
Lowery, D., Gray, V., & Cluverius, J. (2015). Temporal change in the density of state
    interest Communities. State Politics and Policy Quarterly, 15, 263-286.
Lowry, R. C. (2005). Explaining the variation in organized civil society across states
    and time. Journal of Politics, 67, 574-594.
Milbrath, L. (1963). The Washington lobbyists. Chicago, IL: Rand McNally.
Newmark, A. J. (2005). Measuring state legislative lobbying regulation, 1990-2003.
    State Politics and Policy Quarterly, 5, 182-191.
Newmark, A. J. (2008). Interest groups and lobbying in North Carolina. In C. A.
    Cooper & H. G. Knotts (Eds.), The new politics of North Carolina, pp. 85-105.
    Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina Press.
Newmark, A. J. (2017). Lobbying regulation in the states revisited: What are we try-
    ing to measure, and how do we measure it? Interest Groups and Advocacy, 6,
    215-230.
North, D. C. (1992). Transaction costs, institutions, and economic performance. San
    Francisco, CA: International Center for Economic Growth.
Olson, M. (1982). The rise and decline of nations. New Haven, CT: Yale University
    Press.
Opheim, C. (1991). Explaining the differences in state lobby regulation. Western
    Political Quarterly, 44, 405-421.
Ozymy, J. (2010). Assessing the impact of legislative lobbying regulations on interest
    group influence in U.S. state legislatures. State Politics and Policy Quarterly,
    10, 397-420.
Ozymy, J. (2013). Keepin’ on the sunny side: Scandals, self-interest, and the passage
    of legislative lobbying laws in the American states. American Politics Research,
    41, 3-23.
Ranney, A. J. (1976). Parties in state politics. In H. Jacob & K. Vines (Eds.), Politics
    in the American states (3rd ed. pp. 51-94). Boston, MA: Little, Brown.
Rosenthal, A. (2000). The third house: Lobbyists and lobbying in the states (2nd ed.).
    Washington, DC: CQ Press.
Schattschneider, E. E. (1960). The semisovereign people: A realist’s view of democ-
    racy in America. New York, NY: Holt, Rinehart and Winston.
28                                                 American Politics Research 00(0)

Schlozman, K. L. 1984. What accent the heavenly chorus? Political equality and the
    American pressure system. Journal of Politics, 46, no. 4: 1006-32.
Squire, P. (2007). Measuring legislative professionalism: The Squire index revisited.
    State Politics and Policy Quarterly, 7: 211-27.
Steenbergen, M. R., & Jones, B. S. (2002). Modeling multilevel data structures.
    American Journal of Political Science, 46, 218-237.
Thomas, C. S. (1998). Interest group regulation across the United States: Rationale,
    development and consequences. Parliamentary Affairs, 51, 500-515.
Thomas, C. S., Hrebenar, R. J., & Nownes, A. J. (2008). Interest group politics in the
    states: Four decades of developments—The 1960s to the Present. In The book of
    the states (Vol. 40, pp. 322-331). Lexington, KY: Council of State Governments.
Thomas, H. F., & LaPira, T. M. (2017). How many lobbyists are in Washington?
    Shadow lobbying and the gray market for policy advocacy. Interest Groups and
    Advocacy, 6, 199-214.
Williamson, O. E. (1981). The economics of organizations: The transaction cost
    approach. American Journal of Sociology, 87, 548-577.
Wilson, R. (Ed.). (1990). American lobbyists directory: A guide to the more than
    65,000 registered federal and state lobbyists and the businesses, organizations,
    and other concerns they represent. Detroit, MI: Gale Research.

Author Biography
James Strickland is a PhD candidate in the Department of Political Science at the
University of Michigan. His research interests include interest groups and lobbying,
legislative politics, federalism, and U.S. state politics.
