sunlightfoundation.com
How transparent is your state’s
lobbying disclosure? : Sunlight
Foundation
by Jonah Hahn
11–14 minutes
How transparent is your state’s lobbying disclosure?
Image credit: Sunlight Foundation.
Back in 2011, Sunlight, through the work of Daniel Schuman,
Melanie Buck and Eric Dunn, examined the various aspects of
lobbying disclosure at the state level throughout the United States.
After reading legislation about who has to report, when a lobbyist
How transparent is your state’s lobbying disclosure? : Sunlight Foundation
about:reader?url=https%3A%2F%2Fsunlightfoundation.com%2F201...
1 of 9
4/22/26, 11:27
must register, what needs to be included in the necessary forms
and how much lobbyists must pay to register, they concluded that
states could easily offer more data to their citizens.
An update of that database with an emphasis on lobbyist
disclosure requirements, facilitated with informational support from
State Integrity and the National Institute on Money in State Politics,
reveals that many states fail to address the legislative ﬂaws that
create unfortunate loopholes, do not provide citizens with easily
accessible information and navigable websites, and lack stringent
transparency policies. Check out our full scorecard, with rankings
of how each state performed, here. Our methodology and scoring
criteria can be found below.
This investigation was a review of legislative requirements for and
practical implementation of lobbyist disclosure, not an assessment
of the quality of the data’s openness. An analysis of how well
states provide lobbyist disclosure information to the public
according to our “Open Data Policy Guidelines” will be
forthcoming.
Registering a problem
In many states, trying to locate and view a lobbyist’s registration
form is either impossible or logistically complex, making it difﬁcult
for the public to acquire key information about lobbyists or trust
that all the information is being disclosed. Although the method of
registration differs (since not all states offer or mandate electronic
ﬁling), lobbyists in every state must, by law, ﬁll out a registration
document. Yet, what must be included within the registration
document varies widely from state to state. States consistently ask
for a lobbyist’s name, the date of registration and the lobbyist’s
How transparent is your state’s lobbying disclosure? : Sunlight Foundation
about:reader?url=https%3A%2F%2Fsunlightfoundation.com%2F201...
2 of 9
4/22/26, 11:27
ofﬁce address. Lobbying client disclosure ﬂuctuates: Almost every
state asks for the client’s name and address, but more substantial
and useful insight into a client — such as a description of its
business or activities — is frequently not required, or results in
vague, unhelpful summary phrases, e.g. “Health” or
“Transportation.”
Additionally, six states withhold the registration form from the
public entirely. In some circumstances, expenditure reports can
reveal the information generally provided within registration forms,
such as the contact information for the lobbyist. However, since
details about the client’s interests are usually included in lobbyist
registration forms, keeping these forms hidden from the public
prohibits a full understanding of the lobbyist’s and client’s political
motives. Particularly given the technology available, such lack of
transparency is unacceptable. States should, at the very minimum,
upload a PDF version of the form on to their website.
Often if a state uses an electronic ﬁling system, then the
department governing lobbying requires a user ID and password to
access the registration form. (In fact, when conducting research, a
state employee from Ohio informed Sunlight that the only way to
discover the information asked in its form would be to pretend to
be a lobbyist and proceed through the registration process.) While
Sunlight highly encourages states to transition to a modern,
electronic system, that shift should not come at the cost of public
knowledge; states ought to enable the public to access all forms
without log-in credentials.
Given that states generally tend to have fairly robust registration
disclosure, the real focus must be a greater push to improve weak,
inconsistent lobbyist expenditure disclosure.
How transparent is your state’s lobbying disclosure? : Sunlight Foundation
about:reader?url=https%3A%2F%2Fsunlightfoundation.com%2F201...
3 of 9
4/22/26, 11:27
An expenditure issue
Despite the fact that the quality and comprehensiveness of
expenditure reports drastically vary across states, there are two
major impediments to achieving ideal levels of state-level lobbying
transparency: minimum expenditure disclosure thresholds, and an
explicit connection between lobbyist activity and expenditures.
In 33 states, lobbyists are not mandated to disclose all of their
expenditures in a speciﬁc, individual and itemized fashion. A few
states impose low minimums, such as $2 or $5, but in Connecticut,
Ohio and Virginia, for example, lobbyists need not include any
expenditure under $50. On average, the expenditure threshold
tends to be around $25 for a given day or for one particular
expense.
Sunlight opposes any type of reporting limit: Any payment, gift or
beneﬁt to a politician — small or large — deserves to be publicly
available for the sake of accountability.
Disappointingly, few states force lobbyists to explicitly name the
bills, politicians or executive agencies that they are hoping to
inﬂuence or how they want the legislator to vote. Even in the states
that do require such disclosure, lobbyists only need to ﬁll out these
speciﬁcs if they are attached with an expenditure. Eighteen states
will only ask for the full legal name of the ofﬁcial with whom the
lobbyist had contact during a meeting with an expenditure that
exceeded the bare minimum reporting threshold. So, if a lobbyist
meets a politician for a meal and spends money — but not enough
to clear the threshold where applicable — then the bill discussed
and/or the politician present will not be included in the expenditure
report. This winds up being fairly opaque in states like Alabama,
How transparent is your state’s lobbying disclosure? : Sunlight Foundation
about:reader?url=https%3A%2F%2Fsunlightfoundation.com%2F201...
4 of 9
4/22/26, 11:27
where a politician must receive over $500 in a quarter from a
lobbyist to be revealed.
Also, if a lobbyist simply holds a meeting with the legislator on an
issue without an expenditure, then the meeting goes undisclosed.
Many expenditure reports also lack a crucial fact: payroll data. If
an individual makes income from trying to persuade politicians to
act in a particular fashion, the public owns the right to know how
much companies or ﬁrms are paying to get their priorities enacted
into law. Yet in 24 states, lobbyists do not need to report the
ﬁnancial payments they receive in return for their services. That
almost half the states fail to have such disclosure is hugely
problematic and prevents citizens from following the money. States
should adopt new legislation that forces lobbyists to include their
compensation in expenditure reports.
Grading the states on lobbying disclosure
Wondering how your state compares? We have provided the data
we’ve collected below. We relied upon both the legal statutes and
data provided on a state’s website when determining the grade.
We attempted to verify the information with the ofﬁces overseeing
lobbying disclosure, but we gleaned the rest from the public
website. Let us know about what your state’s doing well (or not so
well) with its lobbying disclosure, or how we might be able to
improve our dataset.
We evaluated every state according to the following criteria:
1. Lobbyist Activity: Do lobbyists have to reveal which pieces of
legislation or executive actions they are seeking to inﬂuence?
2. Expenditure Transparency: Are lobbyists required to itemize all the
How transparent is your state’s lobbying disclosure? : Sunlight Foundation
about:reader?url=https%3A%2F%2Fsunlightfoundation.com%2F201...
5 of 9
4/22/26, 11:27
expenses associated with their work, such as travel, holding an
event, or buying gifts for lawmakers?
3. Expenditure Reporting Thresholds: Does the state require
lobbyists to include all expenses in reports, or only those above a
certain amount?
4. Document Accessibility: In order to know whether the state could
be making more information publicly available, it’s important to
know what information they collect. Can the public access lobbyist
registration and expenditure forms?
5. Lobbyist Compensation: Does the state mandate that lobbyists
disclose how much they receive from a client?
To view the entire spreadsheet in a separate tab, click here.
Rubrics:
1. Lobbyist Activity
• 2 – Lobbyists report the bill/action discussed and position taken
• 1 – Lobbyists report the bill/action discussed
• 0 – Lobbyists report the general subjects of lobbying
• -1 – Lobbyists do not report activity
2. Expenditure Transparency
• 2 – Lobbyists report itemized list of expenses with dates and
description of direct expenditure
• 1 – Lobbyists report list of expenses categorized under broad
descriptions, e.g. food, travel, meetings, media, etc.
• 0 – Lobbyists report lump total of expenditures
• -1 – Lobbyists do not report total expenditures
How transparent is your state’s lobbying disclosure? : Sunlight Foundation
about:reader?url=https%3A%2F%2Fsunlightfoundation.com%2F201...
6 of 9
4/22/26, 11:27
3. Expenditure Reporting Thresholds
• 0 – Lobbyists must disclose all expenditures
• -1 – Lobbyists do not need to disclose individual expenditures or
event expenses if under a certain amount
4. Form Accessibility
• 2 – State asks lobbyist to ﬁle digitally and makes blank or ﬁlled out
digital forms publicly available
• 1 – Public can ﬁnd lobbyist registration and expenditure forms
online
• 0 – Public can access blank forms online
• -1 – Public cannot access either the lobbyist registration form or
the expenditure report online
• -2 – Public cannot access both the lobbyist registration form or the
expenditure report online
5. Lobbyist Compensation
• 0 – Lobbyists disclose earnings received from client/employer for
lobbying
• -1 – Lobbyists do not disclose earnings received from client/
employer for lobbying
Miscellaneous observations
Here’s a potpourri of other impressions, opinions and frustrations
while conducting this research:
• Oklahoma’s gift giving law is ripe for abuse. Lobbyists cannot give
politicians gifts except for instances of “infrequently occurring
occasions of personal signiﬁcance,” where a gift up to $200 is
How transparent is your state’s lobbying disclosure? : Sunlight Foundation
about:reader?url=https%3A%2F%2Fsunlightfoundation.com%2F201...
7 of 9
4/22/26, 11:27
permitted. However, no deﬁnition of “personal signiﬁcance” is
given. In a discussion with Geoffrey Long, the general counsel of
the Oklahoma Ethics Commission, he acknowledged that while the
rule is intended for birthdays or anniversaries, passing an
important piece of legislation could ﬁt under the term.
• It’s nice to see states actively disclose potential conﬂicts of
interest. Missouri’s expenditure report contains a section where
lobbyists include any “direct business relationships, association or
partnership with any public ofﬁcial during the reporting period,” and
another for “expenditures made by the lobbyist or principal on
behalf of public ofﬁcials, their staff, employees, spouse or
dependent children, which were solicited by such persons.”
Alabama also has a similar requirement. In every New Jersey
expenditure report, lobbyists must disclose if the lobbyist has
served on the board of “any independent State authority; any
county improvement authority; any municipal utilities authority; any
inter-State or bi-State authority as a member from New Jersey; or,
any board or commission established by statute or resolution, or
by executive order of the Governor, or by the Legislature, or by
any Agency, Department or other instrumentality of the State.”
• Alabama can work to improve the public’s access to lobbying data.
Currently, if you are interested in learning about lobbying in the
state, you must ﬁle a request online for the expenditure reports of
speciﬁc lobbyist or lobbyists. The request must ask for information
exactly as it is provided on the website. After the ﬁles are delivered
to you, they expire after 72 hours, regardless of whether you have
opened them or not. Oregonians also must submit a request form
to the Oregon Ethics Commission in order to get detailed
information on any individual lobbyist. Otherwise, you can only
How transparent is your state’s lobbying disclosure? : Sunlight Foundation
about:reader?url=https%3A%2F%2Fsunlightfoundation.com%2F201...
8 of 9
4/22/26, 11:27
access the gross amount spent in each quarter by any given
lobbyist without any additional data. In Wyoming, the public must
pay to access individual lobbyist reports.
• Regardless of the legal language, if the state agency overseeing
lobbying offers a clunky website, then ﬁnding the disclosed
information becomes a real hassle. Kansas chooses not to hold
any lobbying data before 2015 on its website. Further, the data
presented are not machine-readable nor downloadable in bulk — a
criticism applicable to many states.
How transparent is your state’s lobbying disclosure? : Sunlight Foundation
about:reader?url=https%3A%2F%2Fsunlightfoundation.com%2F201...
9 of 9
4/22/26, 11:27
